A man walks into a Doctor's office screaming, "I'm a wigwam, I'm a TeePee, I'm a wigwam, I'm a TeePee!" The Doctor Says, "You're too Tense"
So the First Pair went forth from the Garden under a curse -- a permanent one. They had lost every pleasure they had possessed before "The Fall"; and yet they were rich, for they had gained one worth all the rest: they knew the Supreme Art.
Combustible rubbish ready to the torch of any one ambitious to illuminate his name.  In Dr. Johnson's famous dictionary patriotism is defined as the last resort of a scoundrel.  With all due respect to an enlightened but inferior lexicographer I beg to submit that it is the first.
Affected with a high degree of intellectual independence; not conforming to standards of thought, speech and action derived by the conformants from study of themselves; at odds with the majority; in short, unusual.  It is noteworthy that persons are pronounced mad by officials destitute of evidence that themselves are sane.  For illustration, this present (and illustrious) lexicographer is no firmer in the faith of his own sanity than is any inmate of any madhouse in the land; yet
A ship big enough to carry two in fair weather, but only one in foul.  The sea was calm and the sky was blue; Merrily, merrily sailed we two. (High barometer maketh glad.) On the tipsy ship, with a dreadful shout, The tempest descended and we fell out. (O the walking is nasty bad!)  Armit Huff Bettle
What shall we do? If we believe, with these people, that their God invented these cruel things, we slander him; if we believe that these people invented them themselves, we slander them. It is an unpleasant dilemma in either case, for neither of these parties has done us any harm.
So pi and the imaginary number are talking... and i says to pi, "be rational." Pi responds, "u shut ur bitch-ass whore mouth or im gon shank u mofo" and i says, "Oh shit just got real."
"Fashion is a form of ugliness so intolerable that we have to alter it every six months." The cycle of fashion is less about style and more about ensuring we never get too comfortable with our own reflection.
Distinguishing insignia, jewels and costume of such ancient and honorable orders as Knights of Adam; Visionaries of Detectable Bosh; the Ancient Order of Modern Troglodytes; the League of Holy Humbug; the Golden Phalanx of Phalangers; the Genteel Society of Expurgated Hoodlums; the Mystic Alliances of Gorgeous Regalians; Knights and Ladies of the Yellow Dog; the Oriental Order of Sons of the West; the Blatherhood
Teacher: What is the formula for water? Student: H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O. Teacher: That's not what I taught you. Student: But you said the formula for water was...H to O.
Denial of something desired; as an elderly maiden's hand in marriage, to a rich and handsome suitor; a valuable franchise to a rich corporation, by an alderman; absolution to an impenitent king, by a priest, and so forth.  Refusals are graded in a descending scale of finality thus:  the refusal absolute, the refusal conditional, the refusal tentative and the refusal feminine.  The last is called by some casuists the refusal assent
Expression of opinion by means of a ballot.  The right of suffrage (which is held to be both a privilege and a duty) means, as commonly interpreted, the right to vote for the man of another man's choice, and is highly prized.  Refusal to do so has the bad name of "incivism."  The incivilian, however, cannot be properly arraigned for his crime, for there is no legitimate accuser.  If the accuser is himself guilty he
[DIRTY] Eye exam Eye specialist: "Sir, you need to stop masturbating." &amp;nbsp; Patient: " Oh my God, is it ruining my eyesight?" &amp;nbsp; Eye specialist: "No. It's disturbing the other patients."
[Dirty] A man goes to a hooker... A man goes to a $10 hooker and contracts crabs. When he goes back to complain, the hooker laughs and says, "What did you expect for $10? Lobsters ?"
PREGNANCY TEST! Girl: Dad, what's better? to pass or to fail? Dad: To pass obviously Girl: OH GOOD, YOU'LL BE PROUD OF ME! I PASSED MY PREGNANCY TEST!
My 5-year-old niece's twist on an old pirate joke **Question:** Why did the pirate have trouble with the alphabet? **Answer:** Because his 'I' was all jacked up. *...she cracks me up*
I made this joke up. Man 1: Hey, I haven't seen you in a few days. What's up? Man 2: Oh, I went pearl diving in Ming Chao. Man 1: Oh? Where's Ming Chao? Man 2: She's getting dressed.
An outlook, usually forbidding.  An expectation, usually forbidden.  Blow, blow, ye spicy breezes-- O'er Ceylon blow your breath, Where every prospect pleases, Save only that of death.  Bishop Sheber
A crowd of theater fanatics walk into a bar. They go to the bartender and say, "One round please." "A round of what?" The bartender asks. "A round of *applause*!" They all scream in unison.
I told my sons i would buy them each a new Nerf gun. Me: "Im going to buy you boys a new Nerf gun today" Son: "I don't want a Nerf gun i want a Transformer" Me: "It's Nerf or nothing"
The smallest current coin.  "The man was in such deep distress," Said Tom, "that I could do no less Than give him good advice."  Said Jim: "If less could have been done for him I know you well enough, my son, To know that's what you would have done."  Jebel Jocordy   AFFIANCED, pp.  Fitted with an ankle-ring for the ball-and-chain.
A duck walks into a store and says, "Give me some fucking Chapstick." The clerk says, "Alright, settle down you feathered cunt... How are you going to pay for that?" "Oh, just put it on my bill."
"HONEY, MY TOOTHBRUSH IS MOVING!" "Has it got ears?" "YEAH." "Tail?" "YEAH." "Is it the dog?" "I THINK I KNOW THE DIFF--AH IT BIT ME AGAIN!"
Did you know: the human body is 60% water, 20% hair, 34% rope, 9% tubes, 12% earrings, 99% eyes, 13% jubjubs, 6% dingdongs, 100% crannies
In politics, an abrupt change in the form of misgovernment.  Specifically, in American history, the substitution of the rule of an Administration for that of a Ministry, whereby the welfare and happiness of the people were advanced a full half-inch. Revolutions are usually accompanied by a considerable effusion of blood, but are accounted worth it--this appraisement being made by beneficiaries whose blood had not the mischance to be shed.  The French revolution is of incalculable value to
"Pornography has really damaged the way you view sex," exclaimed my girlfriend, "I've had enough, I'm leaving." I said, "Before you go, can we fuck on the snooker table while your Grandad watches?"
A man visits a prostitute The man says, "I want to have sex with you for $200, but then I also want to hit you" The prostitute asks, "For how long?" The man replies, "Until I have my money back!"
AVENGERS ASSEMBLE THOR - "here" HULK - "here" IRON MAN - "here" CAPT. AMERICA - "here" USELESS ARROW GUY - ... I SAID- HAWKEYE- I HEARD YOU
Uncommon patience in planning a revenge that is worth while.  M is for Moses, Who slew the Egyptian. As sweet as a rose is The meekness of Moses. No monument shows his Post-mortem inscription, But M is for Moses Who slew the Egyptian.  _The Biographical Alphabet_
I walked past an electronics store once... I saw a TV for sale in the window. The sticker said, "TV for sale, volume stuck on full, $1" I thought to myself, "Wow. I can't turn that down."
My Chinese neighbour told me he'd just opened a "Crows shop". I said, "Don't you mean a clothes shop?" He said, "A Crows shop!" I said, "OK, I might pop down for a Rook."
I woke up with a raging hard on.... I called my wife over and told her to fix my clock. She said "that doesn't look like a clock." I responded, "if you put a face and 2 hands on it it does."
Grammar Nazi. "Sir, we are mining too many useless cores" [Hitler rubs chin] "So, mine less. [Grammar Nazi bursts through the door] "MINE FEWER!" [Hitler looks up] "Yes, soldier?"
A woman caught her husband on the weight scale, sucking in his stomach. "That won't help you, Joe, you know?" "Oh it helps a lot," says the man, "it's the only way I can see the numbers!"
"I like my women like i like my eggs...." Whites only. (or millions of other one-word punchlines, depending on how dark you want to go.) "Fertilized" "Beat" "Rotten" "xtra-large"
The science of adapting sermons to the spiritual needs, capacities and conditions of the congregation.  So skilled the parson was in homiletics That all his normal purges and emetics To medicine the spirit were compounded With a most just discrimination founded Upon a rigorous examination Of tongue and pulse and heart and respiration. Then, having diagnosed each one's condition, His scriptural specifics this physician Administered--his pills so efficacious And pukes of disposition so vivacious That souls afflicted with
A strip of land along which one may pass from where it is too tiresome to be to where it is futile to go.  All roads, howsoe'er they diverge, lead to Rome, Whence, thank the good Lord, at least one leads back home.  Borey the Bald
The leading figure in a small group of men of whom-- and of whom only--it is positively known that immense numbers of their countrymen did not want any of them for President.  If that's an honor surely 'tis a greater To have been a simple and undamned spectator. Behold in me a man of mark and note Whom no elector e'er denied a vote!-- An undiscredited, unhooted gent Who might, for all we know, be President By
The Great Yarn Race **Joe:** Did you hear about the great yarn race? **Jane:** No. Who won? **Joe:** Well, they had to weave their selves through the obstacles and in the end, it was a tie.
Mona Lisa's Mother If Mona Lisa's mother were Jewish, she would have said: "Mona, bubbeleh, after all the money your father and I spent on your brace, that's the biggest smile you can give us?"
I NEED A JOKE! I DONT KNOW IF THIS IS THE RIGHT SUBJECT BUT I REALLY NEED A JOKE THAT INCLUDES -a farmers field -a pack of dogs -burning house -a hospital -set in the nighttime Thanks so much
The first and direst of all disasters.  As to the nature of it there appears to be no uniformity.  Castor and Pollux were born from the egg.  Pallas came out of a skull.  Galatea was once a block of stone.  Peresilis, who wrote in the tenth century, avers that he grew up out of the ground where a priest had spilled holy water.  It is known that Arimaxus was derived from a
I slapped a girl in the face at the bar last night ... She told me her name!! Edit: I made up this while waiting for GoT. Please don't get mad. ^I'm ^^pathic ^^^and ^^^^awkward.
A man only buys water from a dancer. His son notices this and after a while he asks him, "Why do you only buy water from that dancer?" "Because," the father said with a grin, "I enjoy *tap* water!"
Yo momma's so fat that objects 5 meters away accelerate at 1 m/s^2 toward her. What is yo momma's mass if G = 6.67x10^-11Nm^2/kg^2? Please, someone help me, I can't solve it and it's making me nuts.
Aieee, Ginsburg's dead! If you've never heard the joke with this punchline, find someone who knows it and ask him to tell it to you. It's very funny, but it's too long to bother typing out here.
A man with a sheep A man goes home with a sheep under his arm and says "this is the pig I've been fucking." His wife says " that's not a pig, that's a sheep." The man says "I wasn't talking to you."
what did the hat say to the other hat? "you go on ahead." I'd like to thank Twitternation, Steve Wozniak, Adam Schefter, @MattGroening and anyone else who helped me achieve this great feat!
A man goes to the doctor He says, "Doc, I got a problem. I take a huge shit every morning at 8." The doctor asks, "How is that a problem?" The man says, "I don't wake up until 10:30."
In that stage of usefulness which is not inconsistent with general inefficiency, as an _old man_.  Discredited by lapse of time and offensive to the popular taste, as an _old_ book.  "Old books?  The devil take them!" Goby said. "Fresh every day must be my books and bread." Nature herself approves the Goby rule And gives us every moment a fresh fool.  Harley Shum
A poet regarded with indifference or disesteem.  The rimer quenches his unheeded fires, The sound surceases and the sense expires. Then the domestic dog, to east and west, Expounds the passions burning in his breast. The rising moon o'er that enchanted land Pauses to hear and yearns to understand.  Mowbray Myles
Don't tell me what your cats' names are, I'll call'em what I want. Oh, Mittens & Snuggles? WRONG. THAT'S WILDSTYLE & THAT'S SNACKMOUTH.
M R Ducks Person 1: M R Ducks. Person 2: M R Not. Person 1: O S A R. C M Wangs? Person 2: L I B. M R Ducks! My grandmother told me this when I was 5ish. Don't know why it cracks me up.
My neighbor knocked on my door at  2 am this morning and said, "Yo, I can't fcking sleep." "Well it's your lucky day," I said, "I've got a party going on in here, come in."
Oily, smooth, sleek.  Disraeli once described the manner of Bishop Wilberforce as "unctuous, oleaginous, saponaceous."  And the good prelate was ever afterward known as Soapy Sam.  For every man there is something in the vocabulary that would stick to him like a second skin.  His enemies have only to find it.
The doctrine that all things occur according to programme.  This doctrine should not be confused with that of foreordination, which means that all things are programmed, but does not affirm their occurrence, that being only an implication from other doctrines by which this is entailed.  The difference is great enough to have deluged Christendom with ink, to say nothing of the gore. With the distinction of the two doctrines kept well in mind, and a reverent belief in both, one may
One forgotten of the gods and living to a great age. History is abundantly supplied with examples, from Methuselah to Old Parr, but some notable instances of longevity are less well known.  A Calabrian peasant named Coloni, born in 1753, lived so long that he had what he considered a glimpse of the dawn of universal peace. Scanavius relates that he knew an archbishop who was so old that he could remember a time when he did not deserve hanging.
A war in which the weapons are words and the wounds punctures in the swim-bladder of self-esteem--a kind of contest in which, the vanquished being unconscious of defeat, the victor is denied the reward of success.  'Tis said by divers of the scholar-men That poor Salmasius died of Milton's pen. Alas! we cannot know if this is true, For reading Milton's wit we perish too.
How many Shia laBeouf's does it take to change a lightbulb? NonononononononononoNONONONONONO! NONONONONONONO! NONONONONONONONONONONONONONONO! (he can't.)
"PIZZA" IS ACTUALLY AN ANAGRAM... P - PLEASUREFUL I - INTERESTING Z - CANT THINK OF ONE Z - CANT THINK OF ONE A - "AGG"-CELLENT
On a rainy day two men are standing under the poplar trees in the park One of them is weeping:  - John. Do you know how difficult it is to lose a wife? - I know Jack, I know. Practically impossible.
A battle in which spittle or ink replaces the injurious cannon-ball and the inconsiderate bayonet.  In controversy with the facile tongue-- That bloodless warfare of the old and young-- So seek your adversary to engage That on himself he shall exhaust his rage, And, like a snake that's fastened to the ground, With his own fangs inflict the fatal wound. You ask me how this miracle is done? Adopt his own opinions, one by one, And
Humpty Dumpty , that sly bastard Humpty Dumpty sat on his bed, As Little Bo Beep was giving him head, Just as he came she began to weep, She could tell by the taste, He'd been screwing her sheep ! !
A kind of mystic ceremony substituted for religious worship, with what spiritual efficacy has not been determined.  The man who taketh a steam bath He loseth all the skin he hath, And, for he's boiled a brilliant red, Thinketh to cleanliness he's wed, Forgetting that his lungs he's soiling With dirty vapors of the boiling.  Richard Gwow
Literally, the Place of All the Demons.  Most of them have escaped into politics and finance, and the place is now used as a lecture hall by the Audible Reformer.  When disturbed by his voice the ancient echoes clamor appropriate responses most gratifying to his pride of distinction.
Newlyweds tell the hotel desk clerk "we need a room we just got married!" Clerk says "would you like a bridal?" The husband replies" no I'll just hold her by the ears until she gets the hang of it."
An ancient faith having all the certitude of religion and all the mystery of science.  The modern Theosophist holds, with the Buddhists, that we live an incalculable number of times on this earth, in as many several bodies, because one life is not long enough for our complete spiritual development; that is, a single lifetime does not suffice for us to become as wise and good as we choose to wish to become.  To be absolutely wise and good--that is
A man walks in his bedroom with a pig... under his arm. He says: "I fucked this she-swine for 10 years" His wife, shocked, yells: "What?" The man replies: "Shut up, I was talking to the pig."
A structure intended to commemorate something which either needs no commemoration or cannot be commemorated.  The bones of Agammemnon are a show, And ruined is his royal monument,  but Agammemnon's fame suffers no diminution in consequence.  The monument custom has its _reductiones ad absurdum_ in monuments "to the unknown dead"--that is to say, monuments to perpetuate the memory of those who have left no memory.
The Academy is too large and too vulgar. Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures--which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people--which was worse.
A mugged turtle.. A turtle is crossing the road when he's mugged by two snails. When the police show up, they ask him what happened. The shaken turtle replies, "I don't know. It all happened so fast."
He concedes that God gives to each man his temperament, his disposition, at birth; he concedes that man cannot by any process change this temperament, but must remain always under its dominion. Yet if it be full of dreadful passions, in one man's case, and barren of them in another man's, it is right and rational to punish the one for his crimes, and reward the other for abstaining from crime.
What's better than roses on a piano... Tulips on an organ. Let me know if you get it. I'm not gonna lie it took me a couple minutes when a co-worker told me this. Creds: J-mans old man.
Coffee With No Cream A guy walks into a coffee shop. Waitress: What can I get you? Guy: May I get a coffee with no cream? Waitress: Sorry, we just ran out of cream. How about a coffee with no milk?
WIFE: Every time I get close, I get hurt. THERAPIST: Is this true? PORCUPINE HUSBAND: *bristles* OF COURSE IT'S TRUE I'M A BALL OF NEEDLES
A pestilent fellow who, under the pretense of recording some particular stage in the development of a language, does what he can to arrest its growth, stiffen its flexibility and mechanize its methods.  For your lexicographer, having written his dictionary, comes to be considered "as one having authority," whereas his function is only to make a record, not to give a law.  The natural servility of the human understanding having invested him with judicial power, surrenders its
Overheard @ high school's red &amp; white football game Clueless freshman: "So, who are we playing?" Crowd: "It's intrasquad!" Pregnant pause. Clueless freshman: "So we're still going to lose!"
[Ouija board in Starbucks] "Speak to me spirits" O M G H A V E U S E E N W H A T K R I S T Y I S W E A R I N G G R O S S
A Black Man, Arab, priest, Jew, gay and a couple of disabled children walk into pub. Bartender says... "This is just too much. I don't wan't to be part of this joke" And he walks out.
What're nuts on a wall? Bob: What are nuts on a wall? Dan: walnuts? Bob: What are nuts on a chest? Dan: Chestnuts? Bob: What are nuts on your chin? Dan: Chinnuts? Bob: No, dick in your mouth!
In American politics, a person who having failed to secure an office from the people is given one by the Administration on condition that he leave the country.  CONSULT, v.i.  To seek another's disapproval of a course already decided on.
An ancient Egyptian, formerly in universal use among modern civilized nations as medicine, and now engaged in supplying art with an excellent pigment.  He is handy, too, in museums in gratifying the vulgar curiosity that serves to distinguish man from the lower animals.  By means of the Mummy, mankind, it is said, Attests to the gods its respect for the dead. We plunder his tomb, be he sinner or saint, Distil him for physic and grind him for paint, Exhibit
[Programming] Stupid Bugs... 99 bugs in the code, 99 bugs in the code. Take one down, pass it around, 127 bugs in the code. Credit: Benetha619, who donated $5.00 during SethBling's stream today.
The 947th method (according to Mimbleshaw's classification) of obtaining money by false pretences.  It consists in "reading character" in the wrinkles made by closing the hand.  The pretence is not altogether false; character can really be read very accurately in this way, for the wrinkles in every hand submitted plainly spell the word "dupe."  The imposture consists in not reading it aloud.
I recently came out as pansexual. But I'm only attracted to cast iron. I've tried dating teflon, but it never sticks. I guess it's true what they say: "Once you go black, you never go back"
Why does it suck to be an egg? You have to share a room with 11 guys. And it takes you 4 minute to get hard and 2 minute to get soft. The worst part? The only woman that sits on your face is your mom.
The final arbiter in international disputes.  Formerly these disputes were settled by physical contact of the disputants, with such simple arguments as the rudimentary logic of the times could supply--the sword, the spear, and so forth.  With the growth of prudence in military affairs the projectile came more and more into favor, and is now held in high esteem by the most courageous.  Its capital defect is that it requires personal attendance at the point of propulsion.
In international affairs, a period of cheating between two periods of fighting.  O, what's the loud uproar assailing Mine ears without cease? 'Tis the voice of the hopeful, all-hailing The horrors of peace.  Ah, Peace Universal; they woo it-- Would marry it, too. If only they knew how to do it 'Twere easy to do.  They're working by night and by day On their problem, like moles. Have mercy, O Heaven
He was giving a warning: he could not bear the thought of any other God getting some of the Sunday compliments of this comical little human race -- he wanted all of them for himself. He valued them. To him they were riches; just as tin money is to a Zulu.
Interviewer: I heard you were extremly quick at Math... Me: "yes, as a matter of fact I am" Interviewer: "Whats 14x27" Me: "49" Interviewer: "that's not even close" me: "yeah, but it was fast"
CHECK OUT BUZZFEED'S TOP 10 LIST OF GODS FOR ATHEISTS. YOU WON'T BELIEVE NUMBER 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, OR 10.
What's the difference between a guy falling from the 20th or the 1st floor of a building? 20th floor fall goes: *Aaaaaah, BAM!* 1st floor fall goes: *BAM, Aaaaah!*
THE HORROR! *splat THE TRAGEDY! *splat IT'S AWFUL! *splat SO MUCH BLOOD! *splat WHY IS THIS HAPPENING?! *splat -It's raining men.
As a gay male, just once, I wish someone would ask me how I like my coffee. Them: Hey, how do you like your coffee? Me: Like I love my men! Them: Oh, Black? Me: No, anally!
Two melons have a secret love affair... One melon says to the other, "baby, I love you so much. I just wanna sneak away and get married right now." The other responds, "no, we cantaloupe."
Bob: Did you hear about the camper who was killed by a garter snake? Betty: That's impossible. A garter snake is not poisonous. Bob: It doesn't have to be if it can make you jump off a cliff!
AVENGERS ASSEMBLE! THOR: "here" IRON MAN: "here" HULK: "here" PHIL COLLINS - "here" ... ok Phil how do u keep getting into S.H.I.E.L.D man
I saw a bunch of youths hitting an old lady. I stopped my car, wound down my window and yelled, "Excuse me, that's my mother-in-law." "And what?" they replied. "And she's still moving."
Brexit's Worst-Case Scenario: Brexit to be followed by Grexit. Departugal. Italeave. Fruckoff. Czechout. Oustria. Finish. Slovlong. Latervia. Byegium.. until EU reach the state of Germlonely.
In New York, one who does not believe in the Christian religion; in Constantinople, one who does.  (See GIAOUR.)  A kind of scoundrel imperfectly reverent of, and niggardly contributory to, divines, ecclesiastics, popes, parsons, canons, monks, mollahs, voodoos, presbyters, hierophants, prelates, obeah-men, abbes, nuns, missionaries,
Beethoven:Who wants to hear some Symphonies? *crowd goes wild B:I SAID WHO WANTS TO HEAR SOME SYMPHONIES *crowd goes nuts B:I CANT HEAR YOU!
Criticism is itself an art.... It is no more to be judged by any low standard of imitation or resemblance than is the work of poet or sculptor. The critic occupies the same relation to the work of art that he criticises as the artist does to the visible world of form and colour or the unseen world of passion and thought. He does not even require for the perfection of his art the finest materials. Anything will serve his purpose.
Wife: Who let the boys out? Me: Woof woof woof! Her: Who let the boys out?! Me: Woof woof woof! Her: KIDS ARE IN THE STREET! Me: I'm going..
Would you expect this same conscienceless God, this moral bankrupt, to become a teacher of morals; of gentleness; of meekness; of righteousness; of purity? It looks impossible, extravagant; but listen to him. These are his own words:
A certain literary quality frequently observed in popular novels, especially in those written by women and young girls, who give it another name and think that in introducing it they are occupying a neglected field of letters and reaping an overlooked harvest.  If they have the misfortune to live long enough they are tormented with a desire to burn their sheaves.
So a pirate walks into a bar... A pirate walks into a bar with a steering wheel on his pants. The bartender asks him why he has the wheel on him, and the pirate replies "YARR! IT'S DRIVIN' ME NUTS!"
Relating to Descartes, a famous philosopher, author of the celebrated dictum, _Cogito ergo sum_--whereby he was pleased to suppose he demonstrated the reality of human existence.  The dictum might be improved, however, thus:  _Cogito cogito ergo cogito sum_-- "I think that I think, therefore I think that I am;" as close an approach to certainty as any philosopher has yet made.
A small metal disk given as a reward for virtues, attainments or services more or less authentic.  It is related of Bismark, who had been awarded a medal for gallantly rescuing a drowning person, that, being asked the meaning of the medal, he replied:  "I save lives sometimes."  And sometimes he didn't.
3 things happened to me today 1. I woke up 2. I met a hot girl 3. I kissed a hot girl But it happened in this order, 1. I met a hot girl 2. I kissed a hot girl 3. I woke up
By this time you will have noticed that the human being's heaven has been thought out and constructed upon an absolute definite plan; and that this plan is, that it shall contain, in labored detail, each and every imaginable thing that is repulsive to a man, and not a single thing he likes!
I went to a military history exhibit at a museum in Little Italy. I saw a cool old German submarine. I walked up to a guy and said, "Hey, is that a U-boat?" He said, "No, it's-a the museum's!"
Two birds flying through the air... Flugen zwei Vogel durch die Luft. Sagt eine zum anderen, "Vorsicht" da kommt ein Hub-schrau-schrau-schrrau
[Riot] "WHAT DO WE WANT" *far in the back* PIZZA ROLLS "No Jim we want freedom" "WHAT DO WE WANT" PIZZA ROLLS "JIM" But I'm hungry :(
The grunt of the human hog (_Pignoramus intolerabilis_) with an audible memory.  The speech of one who utters with his tongue what he thinks with his ear, and feels the pride of a creator in accomplishing the feat of a parrot.  A means (under Providence) of setting up as a wit without a capital of sense.
The tendency of all bodies to approach one another with a strength proportioned to the quantity of matter they contain-- the quantity of matter they contain being ascertained by the strength of their tendency to approach one another.  This is a lovely and edifying illustration of how science, having made A the proof of B, makes B the proof of A.
What do you call an Orangutan, a tortoise and a hamster in cars? Top Gear, ^^or ^whatever ^^their ^^new ^^amazon ^^car ^^show ^^will ^^be ^^called.
I went into the library and asked if they had a copy of the book, "How to spot a lady-boy". He said, "I'm sure we do, it's probably tucked away somewhere". I said "That's the one".
A frog is sitting on a lily pad in the middle of what is clearly a river. He shouts to a toad on the shore, "Hey, look at me, I'm on a lake!" The toad yells back, "Naw man, you're in de-nile"
One of the Creator's lamentable mistakes, repented in sashcloth and axes.  Being instated as an archangel, Satan made himself multifariously objectionable and was finally expelled from Heaven.  Halfway in his descent he paused, bent his head in thought a moment and at last went back.  "There is one favor that I should like to ask," said he.  "Name it."  "Man, I understand, is about to be created.  He will
Be serious with unknown girls. Boy: The principal is so dumb! Girl: Do you know who I am? Boy: No... Girl: I am the principal's daughter! Boy: Do you know who I am? Girl: No... Boy: Good! *walks away*
LASSIE: Arf! What's that girl? Timmy's in the old well? L: Arf arf He's dead? You sure? L: Arf! Okay here's a check for $5K L: ima need cash
An account mostly false, of events mostly unimportant, which are brought about by rulers mostly knaves, and soldiers mostly fools.  Of Roman history, great Niebuhr's shown 'Tis nine-tenths lying.  Faith, I wish 'twere known, Ere we accept great Niebuhr as a guide, Wherein he blundered and how much he lied.  Salder Bupp
"One of my neighbours had half of his large intestine removed," I said to my mate. "Did he end up in a coma?" He asked. "No," I replied, "But he did end up with a semi-colon."
What does the word 'gay' mean? asked a son to his father. "It means 'happy,'" replied the father. "Oh," contested the son, "so are you gay, then?" "No, son, I have a wife."
If your wife is Q: If your wife is shouting at the front door and your dog is barking at the back door, who do you let in first? A: The dog, of course. At least he'll shut up after you let him in.
Jimmy don't jack off, you'll go blind. Little Jimmy's dad walks into his son's room and says, "Jimmy don't jack off, you'll go blind." Little Jimmy: "Dad I'm over here, in the living room..."
Why was 6 afraid of 7? 1:"Why was 6 afraid of 7?" 2:"Because 7 ate 9" 1:"Ah very good, but why doesn't it matter?" 2:...I don't know 1:"because 6, 7 ate. 6 was already a goner"
Woman finds out her husband is gay Wife: YOU'RE GAY?! WTF. I'm going out! Husband: Where are you going?! Wife: I'm going to find a real man! Husband: Well, don't forget to get me one too!
Bernie has a fucked up Campaign Slogan. As a Jew, why the fuck would his campaign slogan be "Feel the Bern"? Love the guy, best canidate, a bit flawed and optimistic. Don't kill me bernie bros.
A scientist was playing scrabble with his wife She played "PINE", he had "LMHIOJK". He played all of his letters at once to form a 8-letter word along with the "N". What did he make? H20
"I wish you would stop staring at my breasts. " said the barmaid, "you're making me uncomfortable. " "Uncomfortable?" I replied, "you want to try sitting on one of these stools with an hard on. "
It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things. Names are everything. I never quarrel with actions, my one quarrel is with words. That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature. The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one. It is the only thing he is fit for.
To apply for a simple parking permit, you must first prove you've never parked illegally in any dimension or timeline. Unfortunately, the office processing these requests is closed for an eternal review of their own parking situation.
A man visits the doctor... ...who says to him "*Okay, Sir, I think you're going to have to stop masterbating"* *"But why, Doc?*" the man replies. "*Because this is the waiting room*".
Who were the shortest people in the Bible? Let's see. There'sKneehighmiah, Bildad the Shoe-Height...oh, and Peter, who said, "Silver andgold I have none," and no one could be much shorter than that.
A woman met a guy at a bar... ...and asked him what he did for a living. "I'm a jockey," he said. "But I thought jockeys had to be small," she said. "You're average-sized." "This is my day off."
So I was in bed with this woman and she said, "Not in the ass." I said, "Hey, it's my thumb, it's my ass. If you don't like it, go in the other room."  Garry Shandling
Two gay guys are standing on a corner when a hot man walks by. Gay man 1 leans over and says, "See that guy? He's a good fuck." Gay man 2 says, "No shit?" Gay man 1 replies, "Well, hardly any."
How many seconds are there in one year? 12 of them: January 2nd, February 2nd, March 2nd, April 2nd, May 2nd, June 2nd, July 2nd, August 2nd, September 2nd, October 2nd, November 2nd, December 2nd.
But wait -- I am not fair; I am misrepresenting him; prejudice is beguiling me into saying what is not true. He did not say he wanted all of the adulations; he said nothing about not being willing to share them with his fellow gods; what he said was, "Thou shalt have no other gods before me."
At a bathroom line. ''Can I go before you? I really need to number two'' ''No, I was here before you and I need to go as well''. ''I swear I need to go more than you''. ''You're so full of shit''.
An English professor sees a gorgeous blond at a party . . . "Pardon me," he says, "but do you enjoy Kipling?" "Gee, I don't know," says the blond. "I've never kippled before."
The act of blessing or consecrating by the laying on of hands--a ceremony common to many ecclesiastical systems, but performed with the frankest sincerity by the sect known as Thieves.  "Lo! by the laying on of hands," Say parson, priest and dervise, "We consecrate your cash and lands To ecclesiastical service. No doubt you'll swear till all is blue At such an imposition.  Do."  Pollo Doncas   IMPOSTOR n.
Q: If one horse is in the corral, running around the perimeter of the fence, and another horse is running free in a field, which one is singing, "Don't Fence Me In"? A: Neither. Horses can't sing.
They forget to mention that he is the slowest mover in the universe; that his Eye that never sleeps, might as well, since it takes it a century to see what any other eye would see in a week; that in all history there is not an instance where he thought of a noble deed first, but always thought of it just a little after somebody else had thought of it and done it. He arrives then, and annexes the dividend.
Do you know why women aren't allowed in space? * To avoid scenarios like: "Houston, we have a problem!" * "What is the problem?" * "Yeah, great, pretend like you don't know what I'm talking about!"
Anger of a superior quality and degree, appropriate to exalted characters and momentous occasions; as, "the wrath of God," "the day of wrath," etc.  Amongst the ancients the wrath of kings was deemed sacred, for it could usually command the agency of some god for its fit manifestation, as could also that of a priest.  The Greeks before Troy were so harried by Apollo that they jumped out of the frying-pan of the wrath of Chryses into the
The science of vegetables--those that are not good to eat, as well as those that are.  It deals largely with their flowers, which are commonly badly designed, inartistic in color, and ill-smelling.  BOTTLE-NOSED, adj.  Having a nose created in the image of its maker.
God did it. He did not call it the universe -- that name is modern. His whole attention was upon this world. He constructed it in five days -- and then? It took him only one day to make twenty million suns and eighty million planets!
Q: How many letters 'T' are in Indiana Jones? A: 17. Ta-ta-tat'-taaa ta-ta-taa Ta-ta-tat'-taaa ta-taa-taa-taaa!
If I owned my own strip club, I'd probably name it 'The Museum' 'Cause, you know, no touching. If 'The Museum' worked out, I might open another one and call it "Blue Balls." Pretty self explanatory.
An administrative entity operated by an incalculable multitude of political parasites, logically active but fortuitously efficient.  This commonwealth's capitol's corridors view, So thronged with a hungry and indolent crew Of clerks, pages, porters and all attaches Whom rascals appoint and the populace pays That a cat cannot slip through the thicket of shins Nor hear its own shriek for the noise of their chins. On clerks and on pages, and p
A person engaged in reigning.  Formerly the monarch ruled, as the derivation of the word attests, and as many subjects have had occasion to learn.  In Russia and the Orient the monarch has still a considerable influence in public affairs and in the disposition of the human head, but in western Europe political administration is mostly entrusted to his ministers, he being somewhat preoccupied with reflections relating to the status of his own head.  MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT, n.  Government
What's red and hangs from the ceiling? A red ceiling hanger! What's blue and hangs from the ceiling? [you reading this] I don't fucking know, a blue ceiling hanger? No asshole, they only come in RED!
A man was complaining to a friend. "I had it all. Money a beautiful house a BIG car the love of a  beautiful woman then POW! it was all gone!" "What happened?" asked the friend. "My wife found out."
Some guy at a party asked me, "Who's cheese is on those chips?" [Fixed] And I said, "Well, obviously *na-chos*." Get it? It sounds like '*not yours*' with an accent.
Julie: What time is it? Counsellor: Three o'clock. Julie: Ohno! Counsellor: What's the matter? Julie: I've been asking the time all day. And everybody gives me a different answer!
Belonging to an early period and a museum. Antedating the art and practice of perpetuating falsehood.  He lived in a period prehistoric, When all was absurd and phantasmagoric. Born later, when Clio, celestial recorder, Set down great events in succession and order, He surely had seen nothing droll or fortuitous In anything here but the lies that she threw at us.  Orpheus Bowen
My wife was preparing to bake bread... I asked what that was she was putting into the mix. She said, "dill weed". I said, "Darling, you know I love your recipes, but I refuse to eat dill dough!".
There is no one type for man. There are as many perfections as there are imperfect men. And while to the claims of charity a man may yield and yet be free, to the claims of conformity no man may yield and remain free at all.
My life sucks I've got a less-than-minimum-wage job, my best friend has no brain, my neighbor is an asshole, my boss is a stingy bitch, and the worst part... #I live in a pineapple under the sea.
2 cats are trying to cross a river... The first cat is named "One Two Three", and the second cat is named "Un Deux Trois". Only 1 survives, which one? One Two Three, because Un Deux Trois cat sank.
Dad with his son are watching a movie when a sex scene begins \-Son, leave the room please. \-Dad, but I'm 23... \-I don't give a fuck how old you are, you're not going to watch me jack off.
Art never expresses anything but itself. It has an independent life, just as thought has, and develops purely on its own lines. It is not necessarily realistic in an age of realism nor spiritual in an age of faith. So far from being the creation of its time it is usually in direct opposition to it, and the only history that it preserves for us is the history of its own progress.
I was lucky enough to run into Terrence Howard in the street, and I told him that I saw his latest movie once. Condescendingly, as if I were an idiot, he replied, "Don't you mean... two times?"
A writer whose imagination concerns itself with supernatural phenomena, especially in the doings of spooks.  One of the most illustrious spookers of our time is Mr. William D. Howells, who introduces a well-credentialed reader to as respectable and mannerly a company of spooks as one could wish to meet.  To the terror that invests the chairman of a district school board, the Howells ghost adds something of the mystery enveloping a farmer from another township.
At the Last Supper... [At Last Supper] *Jesus raises bread* "This is my body!" *Jesus raises wine* "And this is my blood!" *Pulls out 9 of Clubs* "And this is your card" *Apostles go nuts*
HER: I have something I want to tell u ME: me too HER: *smiles coyly* same time? ME: sure HER: 1,2,3 I LOVE YO- ME: ONE TIME I ATE DOG FOOD
In morals, an indulgence that enforces by appropriate penalties the law of moderation.  Hail, high Excess--especially in wine, To thee in worship do I bend the knee Who preach abstemiousness unto me-- My skull thy pulpit, as my paunch thy shrine. Precept on precept, aye, and line on line, Could ne'er persuade so sweetly to agree With reason as thy touch, exact and free, Upon my forehead and along my spine.
The painters I just got my house painted, and they gave me a bill that said $0. I asked them, "Why aren't you charging me for the paint?" They said, "Don't worry about it, it's on the house."
I said to my neighbour Jamal... I said to my neighbour Jamal, "You're like marmite, you know Jamal." He replied, "What? You love me or hate me?" I replied, "No, you're black and you fucking smell."
Four is equal to five Theorem: 4 = 5 Proof: -20 = -20 16 - 36 = 25 - 45 4^2 - 9*4 = 5^2 - 9*5 4^2 - 9*4 + 81/4 = 5^2 - 9*5 + 81/4 (4 - 9/2)^2 = (5 - 9/2)^2 4 - 9/2 = 5 - 9/2 4 = 5
What does it take to claim the world record for 'most blowjobs in one hour? You need to be able to blow a lot of guys in quick suck session. ^^^yeah ^^^I ^^^know ^^^it's ^^^lame
Micky Mouse is in divorce court The judge says, "So you, uh, want to divorce your wife because she's crazy?" And Mickey says, "Um, no, I think what you heard me say is that she's fucking Goofy!"
Pregnancy in the 1940's. (Doc) - "Mrs. Smith, I have some **great** news for you".... (Patient) - "Thats MISS Smith, doctor!".... (Doc) - "Miss Smith, I have some *bad* news for you"....
Gf:Do u love me? Me:Yes. Gf:Why do u love me? Me:You're the best. Gf:I'm the best at what? Me:Asking questions. Gf: Like what? Me:...
So a Blonde is sitting with her Blonde friend at the bar... ...and says to her friend "I slept with a brazilian last night." "That's **terrible!**" her friend says. "How much is a brazilian?
One who makes heavy purchases of ingratitude, without, however, materially affecting the price, which is still within the means of all.  BERENICE'S HAIR, n.  A constellation (_Coma Berenices_) named in honor of one who sacrificed her hair to save her husband.  Her locks an ancient lady gave Her loving husband's life to save; And men--they honored so the dame-- Upon some stars bestowed her name.  But to
I hate these supposedly "funny t-shirts". Just the other day I saw one which on the front said "I'm not gay..." and on the back said "but my boyfriend is". So I asked my girlfriend to take it off.
In honor of National Limerick day (U.S.) There once was a man from Nantucket Who had a cock so big he could suck it He said with a grin As he wiped off his chin If my ear were a pussy I'd fuck it
An 18 y/o boy getting a BJ from and 80 y/o woman and a tightrope walker have the same thought...What is it? Don't look down! My Dad broke this one out this morning thought I would share.
Young Actor: Dad guess what? I've just got my first part in a play. I play the part of a man who's been married for 30 years. Father: Well keep at it son. Maybe one day you'll get a speaking part.
A person whom we know well enough to borrow from, but not well enough to lend to.  A degree of friendship called slight when its object is poor or obscure, and intimate when he is rich or famous.  ACTUALLY, adv.  Perhaps; possibly.
A blonde and a brunette are on opposite sides of a river... The brunette yells across, "Help me get to the other side of the river!" The blonde yells back, "You *are* on the other side of the river!"
"Full bath?" "Yes sir" "Double beds?" "Yes sir" "Pool?" "Yes sir" "Maid service?" "Yes sir" "WIFI?" "Yes sir" "Kids, I found a campsite!"
Stalk your awful ex on Twitter, Troll oll oll oll oll oll oll oll oll. 'Tis the season to be bitter. Troll oll oll oll oll oll oll oll oll.
X-post from r/jokes: Mommy! I found a $10 bill today, but I threw it away, cus it was fake. "Oh, how did you know it was fake?" "It had two zeroes instead of one."
A festival.  A religious celebration usually signalized by gluttony and drunkenness, frequently in honor of some holy person distinguished for abstemiousness.  In the Roman Catholic Church feasts are "movable" and "immovable," but the celebrants are uniformly immovable until they are full.  In their earliest development these entertainments took the form of feasts for the dead; such were held by the Greeks, under the name _Nemeseia_, by the
dyslexic x 2 1) Did you hear about the dyslexic agnostic insomniac? He laid awake at night wondering if there really was a Dog. 2) So, the dyslexic guy goes into a bra.
A duck walks into a CVS... The duck walks up to the counter and says, "I'd like to buy some chapstick." The clerk says, "Will that be cash or charge?" The duck says, "I'll just put it on my bill."
A man goes to the gas station ... and ask the guy who works there: "How much does 1 drop of gas cost me?" The boy stumbles: "Well euhm ... nothing I guess." "Thanks, I'll have 2 million drops then"
Two muffins are in an oven. The first muffin looks at the other one and say, "Oh my god we're gonna die in here!" The other muffin looks back and says, "Holy Moly! A talking muffin!"
Found in the comments to the picture of a nice looking girl He: "Could you please send me one of your pubes for me to clone?" She: "You know how to clone people?" He: "People?! God no! Just pubes."
A literary work, usually a story that is not true, creeping through several issues of a newspaper or magazine. Frequently appended to each installment is a "synposis of preceding chapters" for those who have not read them, but a direr need is a synposis of succeeding chapters for those who do not intend to read _them_.  A synposis of the entire work would be still better.  The late James F. Bowman was writing a serial tale for a weekly
He was ordered into banishment for a day -- the celestial day. It was a punishment he was used to, on account of his too flexible tongue. Formerly he had been deported into Space, there being nowhither else to send him, and had flapped tediously around there in the eternal night and the Arctic chill; but now it occurred to him to push on and hunt up the earth and see how the Human-Race experiment was coming along.
I went up to this fat bird in the pub last night... "You're a big lass, aren't you?" I said. "Tell me something I don't know," she replied with a tear in her eye. "Salad tastes nice."
People are always mistaking things I say as racist. The other day, this guy thought I called him a 'sand nigger.' But what I said was, 'get out of the sand, nigger. Volleyball is a white man's sport.'
Mexican Magician There was a Mexican Magician standing on the stage. He said, "On the count of three, I will make myself disappear!" "Uno!" "Dos!" POOF! He disappeared without a tres!
I was on a date with a girl at the cinema. We both put our hands into the popcorn at the same time, so to make it less awkward, I said, "Don't worry, that's not the one I masturbate with."
The First Guy to Eat an Egg Person 1: "Hey, dude. I'm gonna eat this!" *Holds up egg* Person 2: "What is it?" Person 1: "I don't know. I saw it come out of a chicken's butt."
A guy walks into his room with a duck under his arm... and says "This is the pig I've been fucking." His wife says "That's not a pig, it's a duck." He says "I wasn't talking to you."
When my mate turned 40, I sent him a CD in the mail... When my mate turned 40, I sent him a CD in the mail: UB40 A month later, on my 40th, I received a CD in the mail from him: U2
A 95 year old man told me this joke. "At my age, it's always something. The other day, my Dr. asked for a Urine sample, a stool sample, and a semen sample. So I gave him my underwear".
I walked in on my wife singing the other day. Surprised, I said "Oh, I thought you were the radio." Flattered, she asked "Did you come to listen?" "No," I replied, "I came to turn it off."
Kill the man Cop: "Did you kill this man?" Me: "No, a bullet killed him. Bullets are made of lead, which comes from the ground. The ground is part of nature. He died of natural causes. Case closed."
I'm not aging; I'm just marinating in life's experiences, hoping one day I’ll be tender enough for someone to find me palatable. But let's face it, I'm more likely to be the tough, chewy bit of steak that everyone politely avoids at the dinner table.
Are you sure? Two hydrogen atoms walk into a bar. One turns to the other and says, "I think I've lost my electron." The other asks, "Are you sure?" "Yes," the first says, "I'm positive."
Two cannibals have just finished dinner.. One says to the other, "your wife made a wonderful meal". The other one says, "I know, I'll miss her very much". Edit:typo Edit: your (obviously)
[faulty megaphone] LISTEN MAN, I {dont} THINK YOU SHOULD DO IT. THERE'S {no} HOPE IF YOU DO. [bangs megaphone on hand] JUST {dont} KILL THEM
My wife phoned me, panting and breathless. "Where are you?" she moaned. "I'm at the pub." I replied. She said, "I think the baby's coming!" I said, "Well, he won't get in. He's underage."
A stench in the ear.  Undomesticated music.  The chief product and authenticating sign of civilization.  NOMINATE, v.  To designate for the heaviest political assessment.  To put forward a suitable person to incur the mudgobbing and deadcatting of the opposition.
A Joke I Thought Up in Stats Why didn't the scientist tell his colleague the t-value of a test with 21 degrees of freedom and a p-value of 5%? It was a t-crit! Thank you and goodnight!
The annual company retreat was themed "Unleashing Potential" where everyone was given a kite with the company logo to fly. The problem? They forgot to include any wind in the budget, leaving everyone to chase their potential across the field.
I wanted to put an England flag in my garden... I wanted to put an England flag in my garden but wasn't sure if it would offend muslim extremists. So I wrote 'Allah is a twat' on it just to make sure.
Whooooaaaa, I'm halfway therrreee WHOOOAAAA, LOSING ALL MY HAIRRRR Take this wig, we'll fake it I swearrrrr WHOAOHH, LOSING ALL MY HAIRRR
The first thing out of my mouth when I was very abruptly and rudely woken up by my neighbor blaring "Trapped in the Closet"... "Ugh, that's the second worse way to be woken up by R-Kelly!"
A man lost $100 bill Teacher: Why are you late? Student: There was a man who lost a hundred dollar bill. Teacher: That's nice. Were you helping him look for it? Student: No. I was standing on it.
So Harambe walked into a bar Bartender: What will you be having to drink? Harambe: I'll have a beer Me: No, he'll have just ice. Bartender: Just ice? Me: Yes, justice for Harambe
Insensible to the value of our advice.  "Now lay your bet with mine, nor let These gamblers take your cash." "Nay, this child makes no bet."  "Great snakes! How can you be so rash?"  Bootle P. Gish
Now then, you have the facts. You know what the human race enjoys, and what it doesn't enjoy. It has invented a heaven out of its own head, all by itself: guess what it is like! In fifteen hundred eternities you couldn't do it. The ablest mind known to you or me in fifty million aeons couldn't do it. Very well, I will tell you about it.
If we lived long enough to see the results of our actions it may be that those who call themselves good would be filled with a wild remorse and those whom the world calls evil stirred with a noble joy. Each little thing that we do passes into the great machine of life, which may grind our virtues to powder and make them worthless or transform our sins into elements of a new civilisation more marvellous and more splendid than any that has gone before.
Blonde's Appendicitis A blonde has sharp pains in her side. The doctor examines her and says, "You have acute appendicitis." The blonde says, "That's sweet, doc, but I came here to get medical help."
Yogi Bear: You gonna eat that? Hiker: THAT'S A BABY. YB: And I'm a talking bear. Hiker: YB: Hiker: YB: So where are we on that baby?
I am not quite sure that I quite know what pessimism really means. All I do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot be lived without much charity. It is love, and not German philosophy, that is the explanation of this world, whatever may be the explanation of the next.
Friendship. (A bit of a dark humour) Friend: I need to save money... Me: Get a life vest Me: And some rope. Friend: Why do I need the life vest? Me: If you have to ask, you might not need one.
"Any women in the audience who think I'm a male chauvinist, say "Boooo!" Every woman in the audience yelled "Booo!" The speaker said to the crowd, "Obedient little bitches, aren't you?"
I walked to the bus stop. This morning I walked to the bus stop and I saw a man there, drinking out of a paper bag. So I said, "Morning!" to be friendly And he said, "Nah I'm just an alcoholic."
Boob Size Grades A ---&gt; Almost Boobs B ---&gt; Barely there C ---&gt; Can't Complain! D ---&gt; Damn! DD ---&gt; Double damn! E ---&gt; Enormous! F ---&gt; Fake G ---&gt; Get a reduction!
Who is dear &amp; near friend... Who's hot... Its U, Who's Charming... Its U, Who's Sweetest.. Its U, Who's Intelligent... Its U, Who's dear &amp; near friend... Its U, Who's a liar.. Its me
An implement, madam, to whose Latin name, _jugum_, we owe one of the most illuminating words in our language--a word that defines the matrimonial situation with precision, point and poignancy. A thousand apologies for withholding it.
Wife: "I'm going to bed, honey." Husband: "Okay, sweetheart. I'll go get you a tylenol." Wife: "But why? I don't have a headache." Husband: "Great! Let's fuck."
Properly, a luminous ring encircling an astronomical body, but not infrequently confounded with "aureola," or "nimbus," a somewhat similar phenomenon worn as a head-dress by divinities and saints.  The halo is a purely optical illusion, produced by moisture in the air, in the manner of a rainbow; but the aureola is conferred as a sign of superior sanctity, in the same way as a bishop's mitre,
Crowned with leaves of the laurel.  In England the Poet Laureate is an officer of the sovereign's court, acting as dancing skeleton at every royal feast and singing-mute at every royal funeral.  Of all incumbents of that high office, Robert Southey had the most notable knack at drugging the Samson of public joy and cutting his hair to the quick; and he had an artistic color-sense which enabled him so to blacken a public grief as to
Ordinary women never appeal to one's imagination. They are limited to their century. No glamour ever transfigures them. One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets. One can always find them. There is no mystery in any of them. They ride in the park in the morning and chatter at tea parties in the afternoon. They have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable mauve.
So, I was at work the other day and... My manager asked, "How good are you at PowerPoint?" I said, "I Excel at it." He replied, "Was that a Microsoft Office pun?" I was like, "Word."
I was banging my neighbors wife, doggy style, when her husband came home... She said, "OH MY GOD, use the BACKDOOR!!" I should've left at that point, but you don't get an offer like that every day...
Getting pulled over Officer (*Walks over*) Officer -I'm going to ask you to step out of the car for a sobriety test. Me (*Presses tits together*) Me -How about now? Officer -Sir, get out of the car.
[Opens hand sanitiser] SUbmiT YoUr SOuL tO EternAL HeLL fiRe [closes lid] wtf? [looks at label] LINDA YOU BOUGHT HAND SATANISER AGAIN
God is back of this. He has been thinking about it for six thousand years, and making up his mind. The idea of exterminating the hookworm was his. He came very near doing it before Dr. Charles Wardell Stiles did. But he is in time to get the credit of it. He always is.
Very well, Adam and Eve now knew what evil was, and how to do it. They knew how to do various kinds of wrong things, and among them one principal one -- the one God had his mind on principally. That one was the art and mystery of sexual intercourse. To them it was a magnificent discovery, and they stopped idling around and turned their entire attention to it, poor exultant young things!
Superfluous; needless; _de trop_.  The Sultan said:  "There's evidence abundant To prove this unbelieving dog redundant." To whom the Grand Vizier, with mien impressive, Replied:  "His head, at least, appears excessive."  Habeeb Suleiman   Mr. Debs is a redundant citizen.  Theodore Roosevelt
"I'll have a cheeseburger with a large coke," The blonde girl requested. "Excuse me miss, this is a library." ^^"I'll ^^have ^^a ^^cheeseburger ^^with ^^a ^^large ^^coke," she whispered.
Two cats are swimming across a river, who made it across? one's name is "one two three" and the others name is "un deux trois". who made it across? one two three, because un deux trois cat sank.
Weird I always was a little different growing up. People are always coming up to me and asking me, "Jay, why are you so odd, why are you so weird?" Then I say, "How the fuck do you know my name?"
Some people say , well I'm glad I'm not as crazy as Jon . And I'm like glad I'm not as crazy as the people in the loony bin . The people in the loony Ben are like.... I'm glad I'm a squirrel.
A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth even glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is always landing. And when Humanity lands there it looks out, and, seeing a better country, sets sail. Progress is the realisation of Utopias.
Guy is taking a super loud dump in the toy. So I kick in the stall door and yell, "Fuck you, man who is shitting!" I kick in the stall door and yell, "Fuck you, man who is shitting!"
Temperament is the law of God written in the heart of every creature by God's own hand, and must be obeyed, and will be obeyed in spite of all restricting or forbidding statutes, let them emanate whence they may.
Here is an old joke my old man used to tell me There is a 4 year old, 6 year old, 8 year old, 10 year old, and me trying to catch a home run ball. Who gets the ball? Me because fuck them
So it's my birthday and my parent sang me happy birthday. Mom: "Happy birthday to you!" Dad: "Happy birthday to you!" Mom: "Happy birthday to you!" Dad: "You were born because your mom sniffed glue."
My dad told me... My dad told me that if I don't get off reddit now he would slam my face on the keybioshdauiewbnfkbhwFIOEWJHFUI9WREFH p9efyh WHBUHF WFH89WRQ FUIWF QUIUIRP P
911 Worker &gt; 911,What's your emergency? Man &gt; My wife is going to give birth! Worker &gt; Is this her first born? Man &gt; No,it's her husband *Ba Dum Tss*
A husband says to his wife, "What would you do if I won Lotto?" She says, "I'd take half, then leave you." "Excellent," he replies, "I won $12, here's $6 - now fuck off!"
A cerebral secretion that enables one having it to know a house from a horse by the roof on the house.  Its nature and laws have been exhaustively expounded by Locke, who rode a house, and Kant, who lived in a horse.  His understanding was so keen That all things which he'd felt, heard, seen, He could interpret without fail If he was in or out of jail. He wrote at Inspiration's call Deep disquisitions on them all, Then, pent
Two non-english speaking Mexican go to gran central... One of them goes up to the cashier and asks for "tu tickets plees". The cashier asks "one-way?" To which the Mexican responds "no, two gueys."
A male relative of an office-holder, or of his bondsman. The deputy is commonly a beautiful young man, with a red necktie and an intricate system of cobwebs extending from his nose to his desk. When accidentally struck by the janitor's broom, he gives off a cloud of dust.  "Chief Deputy," the Master cried, "To-day the books are to be tried By experts and accountants who Have been commissioned to go through Our office here, to see
MAN TO LIZARD: "SO I HEAR YOU'RE IN FLOORING SALES" LIZARD: "IM MORE IN PROMOTION" MAN: "WHAT DO YOU DO" LIZARD: "I REP TILE"
A candid man of affairs. It is related of Voltaire that one night he and some traveling companion lodged at a wayside inn.  The surroundings were suggestive, and after supper they agreed to tell robber stories in turn.  "Once there was a Farmer-General of the Revenues."  Saying nothing more, he was encouraged to continue.  "That," he said, "is the story."
What's the difference between wild Iranian Ossetra caviar and my penis? One is a delicacy (Deh-Lih-Cuh-See) and the other is a delicady (Deh-Lih-Cuh-Dee) Edit: The D
The infancy of youth, the youth of manhood, the entire past of age.  But yesterday I should have thought me blest To stand high-pinnacled upon the peak Of middle life and look adown the bleak And unfamiliar foreslope to the West, Where solemn shadows all the land invest And stilly voices, half-remembered, speak Unfinished prophecy, and witch-fires freak The haunted twilight of the Dark of Rest. Yea, yesterday my soul was
The popular cry of our time is: 'Let us return to Life and Nature, they will recreate Art for us and send the red blood coursing through her veins; they will shoe her feet with swiftness and make her hand strong.' But, alas! we are mistaken in our amiable and well-meant efforts. Nature is always behind the age. And as for life, she is the solvent that breaks up Art, the enemy that lays waste her house.
Let's get a beer Three old guys are out walking. First one says, 'Windy, isn't it?' Second one says, 'No, it's Thursday!' Third one says, 'So am I. Let's go get a beer..'
I bought a metronome recently, I left it in my car as I stopped at the bank machine for a minute, came back and it was gone, someone stole it but was caught... ...now I hear the thief is doing 2/4
Man #1 was talking to man #2. Man #2 asked man #1 how his wife Nature was doing. He said "fine" Then they heard "It's time to go!" #1 said "well Nature is calling, I've got to go #2.
Our company prides itself on 'employee engagement'. That's why we've introduced 'mandatory fun' sessions where we all pretend to enjoy each other's company over mandated coffee breaks. Attendance is tracked, of course.
Heat, says Professor Tyndall, is a mode Of motion, but I know now how he's proving His point; but this I know--hot words bestowed With skill will set the human fist a-moving, And where it stops the stars burn free and wild. _Crede expertum_--I have seen them, child.  Gorton Swope
It's too tight Girl:Its 2 tight Boy:Dont worry,Ill do it slowly, Gal:Push it in, Boy:Ah..I cant, Gal:Its painful, Boy:Forget it. . . . . Well buy new WEDDING RING!
Having dinner last night, my six-year-old turned to me and said, 'Dad, when I grow up, I'm gonna marry you.' We laughed about it. Then my wife said, 'Don't make the same mistake I did.'
The Earth's rotation was originally meant to be clockwise, but it got confused after someone spilled their coffee on the control panel of the universe. Now, we're stuck with days where time feels like it's running away from us, especially on Mondays.
I wrote a poem too. I sneeze. You sneeze. She sneezes. He sneezes. They sneeze. We sneeze. Now I know it's not a very original poem, but it's pretty sick.
So I went over to my uncle with a lisp's house He asked me "hey d-do you w-w-want a d-d-dee-dee-d-d-d-deep-deep-d-deeeeeep freezer?" I replied: "Noo thanks buddy that's too deep for me" [EDIT] Fuck.
I was talking to my buddy about 50 Shades Of Grey He said "yeah, my wife and I have been doing S&amp;M for years." "Really!", I said, "I had no idea!" "Sure," he said, "she sleeps and I masturbate!"
It's like my Mom always said FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW: FW:
A Polar Bear walks into a cafe He says, "I'll have a burger and.... a coke." The waitress says, "Okay. But, why the long pause?" The bear says, "I don't know. I was born with them."
Two polacks are driving in a car The driver: Stick your head out the window and see if my directional is working. Is it on?" The passenger:" Uh yep. nope. yep. nope. yep. nope"
-i am going to hell for this "That's a sexy little outfit you're wearing," I said. "I bet you want my cock in you." "Dave," my wife said, "do you know I can hear you on the baby monitor?"
A cordial composed of one part thunder-and-lightning, one part remorse, two parts bloody murder, one part death-hell-and-the grave and four parts clarified Satan.  Dose, a headful all the time. Brandy is said by Dr. Johnson to be the drink of heroes.  Only a hero will venture to drink it.
An animal of South Africa, which in its domesticated state resembles a horse, a buffalo and a stag.  In its wild condition it is something like a thunderbolt, an earthquake and a cyclone.  A hunter from Kew caught a distant view Of a peacefully meditative gnu, And he said:  "I'll pursue, and my hands imbrue In its blood at a closer interview." But that beast did ensue and the hunter it threw O'er the top
HR: Me: HR: Me: HR:..87. Karen has lost 87 PERCENT VISION.. Me: HR: Me:..she looked at my cheese stick.. HR: Me: HR: Me: *eats cheese stick*
A man whose qualities, prepared for display like a box of berries in a market--the fine ones on top--have been opened on the wrong side.  An inverted gentleman.  BLANK-VERSE, n.  Unrhymed iambic pentameters--the most difficult kind of English verse to write acceptably; a kind, therefore, much affected by those who cannot acceptably write any kind.  BODY-SNATCHER, n.  A robber of
[DARK] A bulky muslim man walks into a gay bar... He says "EVERYONE, WANNA SEE THESE GUNS??" Everyone "YEEEAAAHHH!!!" And. Thats how Orlando happened. And dark humor is never too soon :)
So a ion walks into a bar... So an ion walks into a bar and tells the bartender, "hey I may have lost an electron." Bartender asks in reply, "are you sure?" Ion answers, "yeah, I'm positive."
The pub manager is showing the new busboy around the kitchen, when they come to two doors. The busboy asks, "Which one is the 'in' door?" "Let me show you", says the manager, and 'e walks in.
A woman screams as she gives birth... "What's wrong, honey?" her husband asks. "What's wrong?!?" the woman shouts, "THESE CONTRACTIONS ARE GOING TO BE THE DEATH OF ME!" "Sorry babe. *What is* wrong?"
An elderly Asian man goes to the eye doctor The doctor takes one look at his eyes and says "Sir, I think you have cataracts". To which his patient replies "No i don't, i drive a rincoln rontinental".
There are only two kinds of women--the plain and the coloured. The plain women are very useful. If you want to gain a reputation for respectability you have merely to take them down to supper. The other women are very charming. They commit one mistake, however--they paint in order to try and look young.
Two atoms in a pub Two atoms meet in the pub. One says, 'I think I've lost an electron.' The second atom with a strong British accent asks, 'Are you sure?' The first one replies, ' yes I'm positive.'
me: "we commemorate the day you died every year" jesus: "thats nice, what's the day called?" me: jesus: me: jesus: "keith?" me: "bad friday"
RIDDLER: What has-- BATMAN: A gazebo ROBIN: Matches RIDDLER: Let me finish- BM: A paperweight R: Dental floss RIDDLER: I hate you guys
The watch-dog of Hades, whose duty it was to guard the entrance--against whom or what does not clearly appear; everybody, sooner or later, had to go there, and nobody wanted to carry off the entrance.  Cerberus is known to have had three heads, and some of the poets have credited him with as many as a hundred.  Professor Graybill, whose clerky erudition and profound knowledge of Greek give his opinion great weight, has averaged all the estimates, and makes
Wife: Did you get eggs? Me: pew pew Wife: Great lasers, so did you? Me: pew pew pew pew pee Wife: Why me god. Me: *barrel roll* pew pew
Teacher asks a student to count from 0 to 10 Student : 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Teacher : Where is 5? Student : Yesterday I heard in the news that 5 died in a car accident. DIE
What do you get when you cross a penis and a potato? A dictator. EDIT: In regards to BattletardBlacknigga, I also heard this joke from my dad. Which was awkward but made it funnier in a weird way.....
A convenient deity invented by the ancients as an excuse for getting drunk.  Is public worship, then, a sin, That for devotions paid to Bacchus The lictors dare to run us in, And resolutely thump and whack us?  Jorace
An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness.  In this country satire never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and sympathetic.  Moreover, although Americans are "endowed by their Creator" with abundant vice and folly, it is not generally known
A black guy walks into a bar with a parrot on his shoulder.. The bartender looks at him and says, "Wow, that's pretty cool! Where'd you get it?" The parrot replies, "In Africa, they're everywhere!"
A trite popular saying, or proverb.  (Figurative and colloquial.)  So called because it makes its way into a wooden head. Following are examples of old saws fitted with new teeth.  A penny saved is a penny to squander.  A man is known by the company that he organizes.  A bad workman quarrels with the man who calls him that.  A bird in the hand is worth what it will bring.  Better late than
I used to watch lots of Bruce Willis movies, but now I don't. I guess old habits Die Hard. ^Someone ^please ^slap ^me. ^EDIT: ^Even ^better, ^this ^was ^a ^shower ^thought ^too...
My friend asked if I knew what kind of sweater he was wearing. I said I had no idea, he said "Guess." "Hollister?" "No. Guess." "North face?" "No... Guess" I sill don't know.
A male person commonly known in America as a "crowned head," although he never wears a crown and has usually no head to speak of.  A king, in times long, long gone by, Said to his lazy jester: "If I were you and you were I My moments merrily would fly-- Nor care nor grief to pester."  "The reason, Sire, that you would thrive," The fool said--"if you'll hear it-- Is that of
Q: What is the difference between an UNDERWEAR &amp; a STAGE CURTAIN? A: When you pull down the STAGE CURTAIN, the show is over, but when you pull down the UNDERWEAR..... it's SHOWTIME!!!
Man in a BMW pulls up next to a kid in the street... and says, "Excuse me, lad. If I give you 5 bucks will you come in my car?" Kid says, "Give me 10 and I'll come in your mouth!"
Do these jeans make me look fat? wife : Do these jeans make me look fat? Me totally scared: Would you get mad if i tell you the truth? Wife : No, i won't! Tell me. Me : I slept with your sister
I went to the store to buy 50ft of rope. The guy at the store said "This spool of rope is on clearance for only $2. It's 500ft long." "Nah man" I said "I hate long good buys."
No longer used by the timid.  Said chiefly of words. A word which some lexicographer has marked obsolete is ever thereafter an object of dread and loathing to the fool writer, but if it is a good word and has no exact modern equivalent equally good, it is good enough for the good writer.  Indeed, a writer's attitude toward "obsolete" words is as true a measure of his literary ability as anything except the character of his work.  A dictionary of obsolete and
Wife: you're drunk Me: no'm not Wife: I'M JUST A POOR BOY NOBODY LOVES ME Me: HE JURSTA PRO BROY FUMMA FLOOR FLAMLEE Wife: Me: ok lil bit
So, two muffins are sitting in an oven.... So two muffins are sitting in an oven and one says to the other, "Man, its hot in here." The other muffin replied, "OH MY GOSH! A TALKING MUFFIN!"
Turns out she has a boyfriend.. I see this hot girl wating for the bus so I got over there and said: "Hey, you are fucking hot!" and she is like: "Have you seen Taken, if not - look at me".
What's the difference between a rooster and a prostitute? Rooster goes CockaDOODLEDOOO!! Prostitute goes AnyCOCKLEDOOO!! (Such an old joke maybe some of these young redditors have never heard it ;)
[having sex] ME: oh yeah do you like that HER: faster! ME: *like an auctioneer* doyoulikethat-isee$5foryes-$5foryes-doisee$10-$10foryes
My wife said she wouldn't have sex with me until I did everything on the "To-Do list" So I scratched out **#1** "*Wash the car*" and replaced it with "*Have a three-some with Becky and Wife*"
A Texan says to a Harvard student... Texan: where are ya from? Harvard Student: well, where *i'm* from, we don't end sentences with prepositions. Texan: oh, alright. where are ya from, jackass?
A member of a large and powerful tribe whose influence in human affairs has always been dominant and controlling.  The Idiot's activity is not confined to any special field of thought or action, but "pervades and regulates the whole."  He has the last word in everything; his decision is unappealable.  He sets the fashions and opinion of taste, dictates the limitations of speech and circumscribes conduct with a dead-line.
I introduced reddit to my girlfriend yesterday Me: So, do you like it? Her: yeah, it was entertaining. Just one question, though Me: Sure, go on Her: Yeah, who is OP. And why is his mom such a whore?!
Helen Keller joke thread anyone? Why did Helen Keller's dog commit suicide? You would too if your name was WHHAARRFFUUURRRRGGGGRRRSSSHHHAAAAALLLLLLOOOPPPPMMMNNN!!!!!
My dad was walking around the house screaming yesterday.... He kept shouting, "A, E, I, O, U". "What's wrong?", I asked him. To which he responded, "Nothing, I just have irritable vowel syndrome..."
A drink served at banquets of the Olympian deities.  The secret of its preparation is lost, but the modern Kentuckians believe that they come pretty near to a knowledge of its chief ingredient.  Juno drank a cup of nectar, But the draught did not affect her. Juno drank a cup of rye-- Then she bad herself good-bye.  J.G.
A daily record of that part of one's life, which he can relate to himself without blushing.  Hearst kept a diary wherein were writ All that he had of wisdom and of wit. So the Recording Angel, when Hearst died, Erased all entries of his own and cried: "I'll judge you by your diary."  Said Hearst: "Thank you; 'twill show you I am Saint the First"-- Straightway producing, jubilant and proud,
Pair of Twins I've been shagging a pair of twins recently, and my friend asked me "How do you tell the difference?". I told him "It's easy! Julie has long blonde hair..." "..and Derek has a moustache"
Froth too A guy saw an attractive Jamaican girl; he said...I love cappuccino... He was not attractive at all, so when she him, she was disgusted and spit at him. He said...oh wow with froth too. .
Funny Conversation that actually happened to me Me: Hey Dray is that a new watch? Dray: Yeah man Me: Smooth, what kind of watch is it? Dray: Guess Me: Just tell me, I don't know my watches very well.
Many a young man starts in life with a natural gift for exaggeration which, if nurtured in congenial and sympathetic surroundings, or by the imitations of the best models, might grow into something really great and wonderful. But, as a rule, he comes to nothing. He either falls into careless habits of accuracy or takes to frequenting the society of the aged and the well-informed. Both things are equally fatal to his imagination.
The act of repeating erroneously the words of another. The words erroneously repeated.  Intent on making his quotation truer, He sought the page infallible of Brewer, Then made a solemn vow that he would be Condemned eternally.  Ah, me, ah, me!  Stumpo Gaker
Dust shaken out of a book into an empty skull.  So wide his erudition's mighty span, He knew Creation's origin and plan And only came by accident to grief-- He thought, poor man, 'twas right to be a thief.  Romach Pute
From my 7 year-old son: What rhymes with 'boo' and really stinks? You. Why I oughta...! Edit: Wow, thanks for all the love. My son is quite the character and he really caught me off guard with this!
A conversation with my 7 year old brother. "Look at all of these beautiful horse" "Horses" "Horse is already plural, isn't it?" "You're thinking of elk" "Holy mooses, you're right"
"Hey, mate, rumors have it that you won a car in a lottery, wanna hang out sometimes?" "Yeah, it's mostly true, except it was a house, not a car. And poker, not lottery. And lost, not won".
WARNING ! ! ! This is a VIRUS . . . When you turn your phone off it WON'T WORK AGAIN.. U are a BITCH Beautiful Intelligent Talented Cute Hilarious r u smiling now? ? ? ? *YOU ARE REALLY BITCH*
The Beatitudes and the quoted chapters from Numbers and Deuteronomy ought always to be read from the pulpit together; then the congregation would get an all-round view of Our Father in Heaven. Yet not in a single instance have I ever known a clergyman to do this.
In ancient times a general punishment of the innocent for admonition of their ruler, as in the familiar instance of Pharaoh the Immune.  The plague as we of to-day have the happiness to know it is merely Nature's fortuitous manifestation of her purposeless objectionableness.
In matrimony a similarity of tastes, particularly the taste for domination.  Incompatibility may, however, consist of a meek-eyed matron living just around the corner.  It has even been known to wear a moustache.
A popular entertainment given to the military by innocent bystanders.  R.I.P.  A careless abbreviation of _requiescat in pace_, attesting an indolent goodwill to the dead.  According to the learned Dr. Drigge, however, the letters originally meant nothing more than _reductus in pulvis_.
"Spirits, are you there?" [ouija board] IF  YOU  LIKE  IT  THEN  YOU  SHOULDA  PUT  A  RING  ON  IT "Damn it, we've held a seaonce again!"
A wife asks her newfie husband to stop by the grocery store on the way home... She tells him, "pick up a loaf of bread, and if they have eggs, get a dozen" He comes home later with 12 loaves of bread
TIFU by asking a chinese girl's number... I asked a Chinese girl for her number. She replied, "Sex! Sex! Sex! Free sex tonight!" I said, "Wow!" Then her friend said, "She means 6663629."
The climate of the hour.  A permanent topic of conversation among persons whom it does not interest, but who have inherited the tendency to chatter about it from naked arboreal ancestors whom it keenly concerned.  The setting up official weather bureaus and their maintenance in mendacity prove that even governments are accessible to suasion by the rude forefathers of the jungle.  Once I dipt into the future far as human eye could see, And I saw the Chief Forecaster, dead
Polceman: "I'm afraid that I'm going to have to lock you up for the night." Man: "What's the charge?" Polceman: "Oh there's no charge. It's all part of the  service.
Lets write a joke I'll give you of two the punch lines, you give me the setup: Punch line #1: That's the line time I'll go to that bar. Punch line #2: Liquor, I don't even like her.
What's the difference between a piano, a tuna and a jar of glue? You: You can tuna piano but you can't piano a tuna! Person getting told joke: What about the glue? You: I knew you'd get stuck there!
MISSING HER SHE SAID SHE DON'T WANT TO BE IN A RELATIONSHIP, THEN I WON 300,00 DOLLARS AND NOW SHE WANTS ME......I GAVE HER A DOLLAR AND TOLD HER WENDY'S IS OPEN.....LOL
Nephew: Really?! Me: Yup! Go for it! N: *runs into wall* Me: *takes pic* N: *wakes up* Am I at Hogwarts? Me: No, we'll try again later.
What does a guy who can predict the lottery numbers 99% of the time have in common with the letters C, D, G, H, J, K, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, and Z? They're not infallible
The ancient prototype and forerunner of political influence.  It was, however, deemed less respectable and sometimes was punished by torture and death.  Augustine Nicholas relates that a poor peasant who had been accused of sorcery was put to the torture to compel a confession.  After enduring a few gentle agonies the suffering simpleton admitted his guilt, but naively asked his tormentors if it were not possible to be a sorcerer without knowing it.
Monkey Jokes are alway funny Two monkeys in a bath, The first Monkey says O OOH OOK OOH OOK OOH OOK OOH AHHHHH AHH AHH AHH AHHH. The second Monkey says well put some bloody cold water in then...
My wife phoned me, panting and breathless. "Where are you?" she moaned. "I'm at the pub." I replied. She said, "I think the baby's coming!" I said, "She won't get in, she's under-age."
So two muffins are in an oven... One muffin turns to the other and says, "Boy! It is getting hot in here!" The other muffin replies, "WE ARE GOING TO DIE IN HERE AND NO ONE WILL HEAR US SCREAM"
"The only thing worse than being talked about is being ignored by someone you’re trying to ghost." Society's obsession with being noticed has reached such heights that even our disappearances must be theatrical performances, demanding an audience.
The man is crying on the cemetry. -Why did you leave us so early? He is asked why are you so crying? Do you cry about your close relative? -No, I am crying about the first husband of my wife.
A boy asks his mother a question Boy: "Mom, why's my cousin named Jasmine?" Mom: "That's because your aunt likes flowers." Boy: "Mom, what do you like?" Mom: "Oh, be quiet Richard"
A chap who can tell you offhand the difference between the outside of the world and the inside.  Habeam, geographer of wide reknown, Native of Abu-Keber's ancient town, In passing thence along the river Zam To the adjacent village of Xelam, Bewildered by the multitude of roads, Got lost, lived long on migratory toads, Then from exposure miserably died, And grateful travelers bewailed their guide.  Henry Haukhorn
The god of the world's leading religion.  The chief temple is in the holy city of New York.  He swore that all other religions were gammon, And wore out his knees in the worship of Mammon.  Jared Oopf
The title with which we brand unmarried women to indicate that they are in the market.  Miss, Missis (Mrs.) and Mister (Mr.) are the three most distinctly disagreeable words in the language, in sound and sense.  Two are corruptions of Mistress, the other of Master.  In the general abolition of social titles in this our country they miraculously escaped to plague us.  If we must have them let us be consistent and give one to the unmarried man.  I
Dun-na-na-na-na-na-na-na Running down the motor-way, A lorr-ie comes the other-way, Dun-na-na-na-na-na-na-na, Splat-Man!
To this day his reason has never recovered from that shock; a wild nightmare of vengefulness has possessed him ever since, and he has almost bankrupted his native ingenuities in inventing pains and miseries and humiliations and heartbreaks wherewith to embitter the brief lives of Adam's descendants. Think of the diseases he has contrived for them! They are multitudinous; no book can name them all. And each one is a trap, set for an innocent victim.
"U put on suntan lotion?" "No" "Youll get sunburned!" *sun descends, his voice echoes loudly* "NICE BICEPS BRO, UR LIL SISTER LOAN EM TO U?"
WHO LET THE CATS OUT? Mew. Mew. Mew. Mew. WHO LET THE CATS OUT? Mew. Mew. MRRROOW! HSSSSS! MRRROOW! HSSSSS! FUCK! HE'S AN INSIDE CAT!
Almost Instant Joy Find any Fast Song (Rap to Electro) Click Settings, Crank up the Speed 1.25: 1.5: Instant Twerk Music 2: The 2 is for 2Fast6You Only on Computers. RIP Phone Users
The oldest joke I know A girl with no arms or legs was sad on the beach. A man walked up and asked what was wrong. She said she'd never been fucked. He threw her in the water and said, "Now ur fucked"
Micky mouse is in court and the judge says to him "I can't grant you divorce on the fact your wife has bucked teeth" Micky says "I didn't say she has bucked teeth, I said she was fucking goofy"
Little Girl: mom, I want to be an alligator when I grow up Mom: well, pick one. You can't be...acghhghh! Stop eating me! Aghhghhh...ah..a...bleh.
The Muffin Joke Two muffins were sitting in an oven. One turned to the other and said "Hey, it's pretty hot in here, isn't it?" The other turned and shouted "Oh my god a talking muffin!"
Walked out the pub the other night and seen a bloke at the end of the road with a broken down car. I said "what's the matter mate?" he said "piston broke" I said "so am I!" and stumbled home.
[Latin]  Among the Greeks and Romans, sacrifices for propitiation of the _Dii Manes_, or souls of the dead heroes; for the pious ancients could not invent enough gods to satisfy their spiritual needs, and had to have a number of makeshift deities, or, as a sailor might say, jury-gods, which they made out of the most unpromising materials.  It was while sacrificing a bullock to the spirit of Agamemnon that Laia
Official Pirate Week! 19/5-25/5 It seems as if we're doing pirates, so we might as well have an official pirate week. Normal jokes are ok, but also lots of Pirate themed ones. Arrrbitrary Piratejokes!
SIX PHASES OF THE MONTH IN NAVY RECRUITING  1. ENTHUSIASM  2. DISILUSIONMENT  3. PANIC  4. SEARCH FOR THE GUILTY  5. PUNISHMENT OF THE INNOCENT  6. PRAISE AND HONORS FOR THE NON-PARTICIPANTS
For instance, take this sample: he has imagined a heaven, and has left entirely out of it the supremest of all his delights, the one ecstasy that stands first and foremost in the heart of every individual of his race -- and of ours -- sexual intercourse!
Cleopatra's last wish was not for power or love, but for a time machine so she could see if her eyeliner trend would still be in style. Sadly, the only time travel she encountered was the timelessness of her memes on social media.
To be born, or at any rate bred, in a handbag, whether it had handles or not, seems to me to display a contempt for the ordinary decencies of family life that reminds one of the worst excesses of the French Revolution.
Son: "Mom, Dad, I'm gay." Mom: *Stares at Dad* Dad: *Clenches fist* Mom: "Don't!" Dad: *Sweats Profusely* Mom: "..." Dad: "HI GAY, I'M DAD"
[pet therapy] THERAPIST: ok slow ME: *pets 2 dogs* T: just 1 M: *pets 3 dogs* T: Nurse, restrain him, he's M: *pets 4 dogs* T: roverdosing
Art creates an incomparable and unique effect, and having done so passes on to other things. Nature, on the other hand, forgetting that imitation can be made the sincerest form of insult, keeps on repeating the effect until we all become absolutely wearied of it.
How many Freudians does it take to change my mother? Edit: Sorry, I mean light bulb. &amp;nbsp; A: Two. One to change the light bulb, and one to hold my dick. &amp;nbsp; Edit: Dang. I mean the ladder.
Modernity of form and modernity of subject-matter are entirely and absolutely wrong. We have mistaken the common livery of the age for the vesture of the muses, and spent our days in the sordid streets and hideous suburbs of our vile cities when we should be out on the hillside with Apollo. Certainly we are a degraded race, and have sold our birthright for a mess of facts.
So Helen Keller walks into a bar . . . . . . then she walks into a table, she knocks over a lamp, barks her shins on the ottoman, spills a drink . . . it's fine I'll show myself out.
HAMLET:*Draws sword* How now! a rat?? *stabs curtain* LORD POLONIUS: O, I am slain! This is the w'rst game of hideth and seeketh ev'r *dies*
Boko Haram Has Really CHANGED. I used to like these guys a lot. "Whiter Shade of Pale" was a great, great song. Look at them now. What happened with them? They sure made a wrong turn, somewhere!
A bear and a bunny... Are shitting in the woods. The bear asks the bunny: "Do you find that shit sticks to your fur?" The bunny says, "No, why?" So the bear picks up the bunny and wipes his ass.
So I got a phone call from the post office today... ...complaining that my dog is attacking a postman on a bike. But I told them "It can't be my dog... he doesn't even know how to ride a bike".
[creation] GOD: You each have a gift WORM: What's mine? G: You...spin silk BEE: How bout me? G: Uh...make honey HIPPO: And me? G: Hm...eat marbles
The science and history of the animal kingdom, including its king, the House Fly (_Musca maledicta_).  The father of Zoology was Aristotle, as is universally conceded, but the name of its mother has not come down to us.  Two of the science's most illustrious expounders were Buffon and Oliver Goldsmith, from both of whom we learn (_L'Histoire generale des animaux_ and _A History of Animated Nature_) that the domestic
Queer Irishman Sean: Did ya here the one about the queer Irishman? Brian: No. Sean: Seems he was spotted leaving the pub at 11 o'clock with a girl. Brian: So? Sean: Closing time's one.
1am: Huh, I'm not tired... 2am: I feel great! Maybe I don't need sleep? 3am: LET'S EXECUTE EVERY IDEA I'VE EVER HAD. 3:04am: Euthanise me.
The state or condition in which the wicked cease from struggling and the dreary are at rest.  Fame's eternal dumping ground. Cold storage for high hopes.  A place where ambitious authors meet their works without pride and their betters without envy.  A dormitory without an alarm clock.
The people who have adored me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have always insisted on living on long after I had ceased to care for them or they to care for me. They have become stout and tedious, and when I meet them they go in at once for reminiscences. That awful memory of women! What a fearful thing it is! And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals!
Joke From My Niece Her: Why did the chicken cross the road? Me: Why? Her: To get to the ugly guy's house. Me:??? Her: Knock knock Me: Who's there? Her: It's the chicken!
My mate asked me why I have sex noises saved on my ipod. "I said, "It's for sound effects during sex." "He asked, "Your wife a bit quiet in the sack?" "I replied, "No, I work in a morgue."
Band:Make some noise! Crowd:WOOO! Me:THATS SO VAGUE! WHAT KIND OF NOISE?! B:I cant hear u! C:WOOO! M:B/C UR PLAN WAS FLAWED FROM THE START!
People talk so much about the beauty of confidence. They seem to entirely ignore the much more subtle beauty of doubt. To believe is very dull. To doubt is intensely engrossing. To be on the alert is to live, to be lulled into security is to die.
If your wife is shouting Q: If your wife is shouting at the front door and your dog is barking at the back door, who do you let in first? A: The dog -- at least he'll quiet down after you let him in.
Bus trip Son: 'Mum, when I was on the bus with Dad this morning, he told me to give up my seat to a lady.' Mom: 'Well, you have done the right thing.' Son: 'But mum, I was sitting on daddy's lap.'
Pooh: There's a rumbly in my tumbly Piglet: What? Pooh: There's. A. Rumbly. In. My. Tumbly Piglet: Pooh: I'm hungry Piglet: Say that then
Crees que soy muy bajita? La novia pregunta al novio - Amor Crees que soy muy bajita? - Pues tienes una estatura comun. - De veras? - Si, comun-duende. jajaja que grosero verdad
Breathing heavily, she asked me what I can give her. Me: "I'll give you a hint, it starts with a D" Her: "Oh yess, I can't wait!" Me: "That's right, get ready for some disappointment!"
Two cows are standing in a field ...and one says to the other, "Say, are you worried about this mad cow disease going around?" And the other one says, "Why should I care? I'm a helicopter! PFFFFFT!"
Dad got me the other day... Me: I can't sleep... I'm just going to stay up for a bit... Dad: What do you mean you can't sleep? It's so easy I could do it with my eyes close! Me: *walks away*
"Babe, is it in?" *"Yea."* **"Does it hurt?"** *"Uh huh."* **"Let me put it in slowly."** *"It still hurts."* **"Okay, let's try another shoe size."**
Son: "Mom, Dad.. I'm gay" Mom: *staring at dad Dad: ...*clenches fists Mom: ...don't! Dad: *sweats profusely Mom: Dad: HI GAY, IM DAD Kudos to @Lerky on Twitter
Hey where's Brian? "Oh he's taking a p_ _p" A what? "Um dropping a d_ _c_" Huh? "Taking a sh_t....Uhh Cr_p!" Oh! He's evacuating his vowels?
[guy next to me at urinal] "Is that a 5 or 6?" ...about 5-1/2 I guess. "Really? (looks at iPhone on my hip) Can I see it?" *zips up* No.
A father walks up to his son... and says to him, "Do we have any more dopted?" The son says, "What's a dopted?" "You are!" "Dad, that's not funny." "I'm not your dad!" (Credit to my bartender Casey)
5yo: [loudly whispers] MOMMY, SEE? WE'RE LETTING YOU AND DADDY SLEEP! AREN'T WE DOING GOOD? Me: [in bed] Yeah. You're doing GREAT.
Size.  Magnitude being purely relative, nothing is large and nothing small.  If everything in the universe were increased in bulk one thousand diameters nothing would be any larger than it was before, but if one thing remain unchanged all the others would be larger than they had been.  To an understanding familiar with the relativity of magnitude and distance the spaces and masses of the astronomer would be no more impressive than those of the microscopist. For anything we know to the contrary, the visible universe
Inexpedient.  Whatever in the long run and with regard to the greater number of instances men find to be generally inexpedient comes to be considered wrong, wicked, immoral.  If man's notions of right and wrong have any other basis than this of expediency; if they originated, or could have originated, in any other way; if actions have in themselves a moral character apart from, and nowise dependent on, their consequences--then all philosophy is a lie and reason a
A representation in two dimensions of something wearisome in three.  "Behold great Daubert's picture here on view-- Taken from Life."  If that description's true, Grant, heavenly Powers, that I be taken, too.  Jali Hane
Last night, during sex, I suddenly stopped and didn't move... She was like, "What the hell are you doing!?" And I was like, "Hush baby, I saw this on PornHub....it's called 'buffering'."
My boss texted me... My boss texted me: "Send me one of your funny jokes" I replied: "I will send you one l8r, I'm working right now" He replied: "LMAO, send me another one!"
Dad: Level Expert Two cupcakes were baking in the oven. One of them turns to the other and say 'Wow! Its hot in here, isn't it?', the second cupcakes screams 'AAAaaaaa! A talking cupcake!'
If Royce Da 5'9 gave up his career in rapping.. He'd become Royce Da 9-5. ^^^^Mixed ^^^^up ^^^^the ^^^^numbers ^^^^last ^^^^time.
The gift or power of being in all places at one time, but not in all places at all times, which is omnipresence, an attribute of God and the luminiferous ether only.  This important distinction between ubiquity and omnipresence was not clear to the mediaeval Church and there was much bloodshed about it.  Certain Lutherans, who affirmed the presence everywhere of Christ's body were known as Ubiquitarians.  For this error they were doubtless damned, for Christ
Two jewelers saw a man get shot to death. The first jeweler looks at the second and says, "I'm absolutely opalled! The second just looks down and says, "I dunno man, I'm just too jaded to care."
A girlfriend and boyfriend are talking... The girl says, "hey John, how do you spell 'pedophilia?'" He responds, "gosh honey, why do you need to know? That's an awfully big word for an 8 year old."
I asked my sister how her blind date went "Oh it was terrible" she said, "He showed up in a 1948 Rolls-Royce." "So what's so bad about *that*?" I asked. Apparently he was the original owner.
A public singer with a good voice but no ear.  In Virginia City, Nevada, he is called the Washoe Canary, in Dakota, the Senator, and everywhere the Donkey.  The animal is widely and variously celebrated in the literature, art and religion of every age and country; no other so engages and fires the human imagination as this noble vertebrate.  Indeed, it is doubted by some (Ramasilus, _lib. II., De Clem._, and C.
This Bible is built mainly out of the fragments of older Bibles that had their day and crumbled to ruin. So it noticeably lacks in originality, necessarily. Its three or four most imposing and impressive events all happened in earlier Bibles; all its best precepts and rules of conduct came also from those Bibles; there are only two new things in it: hell, for one, and that singular heaven I have told you about.
In America the chief executive officer of a county, whose most characteristic duties, in some of the Western and Southern States, are the catching and hanging of rogues.  John Elmer Pettibone Cajee (I write of him with little glee) Was just as bad as he could be.  'Twas frequently remarked:  "I swon! The sun has never looked upon So bad a man as Neighbor John."  A sinner through and through, he had This
A daughter of Hope and Fear, explaining to Ignorance the nature of the Unknowable.  "What is your religion my son?" inquired the Archbishop of Rheims. "Pardon, monseigneur," replied Rochebriant; "I am ashamed of it." "Then why do you not become an atheist?" "Impossible!  I should be ashamed of atheism." "In that case, monsieur, you should join the Protestants."
Heart melting love story: Boy: My wife &amp; 2 kids. Heart melting love story: Boy: I can't marry u. My family is totally against it. Girl: Who r they 2 stop u? Boy: My wife &amp; 2 kids.
My mom told me that I objectify women. When she asked me why I broke up with my last girlfriend I said "it didn't work out." She said "be more specific." I said "I just told you she didn't exercise."
What's the biggest similarity between a bottle of Draino and a Danish stripper? They both slowly remove clogs. ^^They're ^^also ^^both ^^in ^^a ^^barrel ^^in ^^my ^^garage.
FREE IPAD FOR ANSWERING A SIMPLE SURVEY. 1) WHERE DO YOU LIVE? 2) DO YOU OWN WEAPONS? 3) WHEN ARE YOU MOST VULNERABLE? #NIGHTOFTHEFREEIPAD
I just heard a beautiful poem... "I dig, you dig, we dig, he dig, she dig, they dig, we all dig." I'll admit it's not a very *beautiful* poem, but it sure is deep.
There is the same world for all of us, and good and evil, sin and innocence, go through it hand in hand. To shut one's eyes to half of life that one may live securely is as though one blinded oneself that one might walk with more safety in a land of pit and precipice.
What did one friend say to another on a flight that made him get escorted off of it? (WARNING: PUNNY AS HELL) "Hi Jack! These airplanes are da bomb!" how did i do? thought of it a couple days ago.
What is the most sensitive part of a mans anatomy while he's masturbating? His ears. Oooo! I get to say it! "Front page?! Wow! Thanks y'all!" Oh yea, and "RIP my inbox" Good times!
I was flirting with an Asian girl at a bar last night when I decided to ask for her number. She replied, "Sex! Sex! Sex! Free sex tonight!" I said, "Wow!" Then her friend said, "She means 6663629".
This Heat is Like a Middle Eastern Dictator... This Heat is Like a Middle Eastern Dictator. It's oppressive, you can't get away from it, and I'm pretty sure we can blame the U.S. for it.
"What kind of dog is this?" "Well actu.." "Hes cute" *pets it* "Sir thats my.." *picks it up* "Your a good dog arent you?" "PUT MY SON DOWN"
mother told me this What do you call 5 mexicans, and asian, and 5 black people in your front yard?? Water sprinkler.... spic-spic-spic-spic-spic---CHINK---nigga-nigga-nigga-nigga-nigga
A kind of additional or subsidiary Deity designed to catch the overflow and surplus of the world's worship.  This Divine Being in some of his smaller and silkier incarnations takes, in the affection of Woman, the place to which there is no human male aspirant.  The Dog is a survival--an anachronism.  He toils not, neither does he spin, yet Solomon in all his glory never lay upon a door-mat all day long, sun-soaked and
Which of these three does not belong: (A) a lobster, (B) a flounder, or (C) a Korean man who has just been run over by a bus? The answer is (B) a flounder. The other two are crushedAsians.
Rabbit: I got kicked out of my cage for not  paying the rent. My wife walked out and took our twenty-nine bunnies with her. I'm all out of carrots. What should I do? Friend: Don't worry; be hoppy!
What do you call a deer with no eyes? No eye deer. What do you call a deer with no eyes or legs? Still no eye deer. What do you call a deer with no eyes, legs, or genitalia? Still no fucking eye deer.
My friend and I were hiking Me: "That's a huge rock over there!" Him: "Boulder." Me: **"That's a huge rock over there."** EDIT: Thank you guys for the most upvoted post I've made!
So I was in Jerusalem and a man was trying to sell me a gold watch... I kept telling him I don't want it. It looks too fake, not real gold. He looked at me and says "It's not fake, Israel."
Two Scottish guys discussing a wedding.. First guys asks "What are ye wearing to yer weddin'?" Second fella says "A kilt of course!" First fella "What's the tartin?" "She's wearing white" says his pal
A TCP packet walks into a bar... ... and says to the barmen: "Hello, I'd like a beer." the barman replies: "Hello, you'd like a beer?" "Yes," replies the packet, "I'd like a beer."
Why did the chicken cross the road? FUCK, MY CHICKEN'S IN THE ROAD? WHY THE FUCK DIDN'T YOU DO SOMETHING?! JESUS CHRIST, HE COULD GET RAN THE FUCK OVER! YOU'RE A FUCKING IDIOT!!
SHARKY_GAMING SHOULD DIE IN HELL HE SHOULD BE FORCED TO FUCK MY ASS AND EVERY THRUST HE DOES HE FEELS THE PAIN WE DO He Betrayed Us. He Should Burn. He Should Die.
Heard this one from my little brother. Poor Timmy... Him: Why did Timmy fall off the swing? Me: why? Him: Timmy has no arms. Knock knock. Me: Who's there? Him: Not Timmy.
My mate asked me why I had sex noises saved on my iPod... I said, "It's for sound effects during sex". He asked, "Ah, is the wife a bit quiet in the bedroom?" "No," I replied, "I work in a morgue."
*Wife thumps door* "I KNOW UR IN THERE! U BLEW OUR SAVINGS ON A SHITTY INVENTION, DIDN'T U?!" NO! *furiously flushes 1000s of dog-tampons*
Every time I notice some loser has deleted me for being totally awesome, I wish that the small Asian from "The Hangover" would pop up on their screen and scream, "Tooood-a-loooo muthaf$ckaaaaasss!"
An oldie for the road This randomly popped into my head at work and as I started saying it, my boss finished it. *Twats* that? I *cunt* hear you. *Tits* okay. I'll *finger* it out later.
#I #love #how #you #hashtag #a #million #words #on #all #your #instagram #pics. #i #hope #you #get #your #period #in #a #sharktank.
Knock...Knock... Who's there? Interrupting cat... Int(meow)err(meow)upt(meow)ing(meow)(meow)c(meow)at(meow)who? Meow...
An ingenious modern game of chance in which the player is permitted to enjoy the comfortable conviction that he is beating the man who keeps the table.  INSURANCE AGENT:  My dear sir, that is a fine house--pray let me insure it. HOUSE OWNER:  With pleasure.  Please make the annual premium so low that by the time when, according to the tables of your actuary, it will probably be destroyed by fire I will have paid you considerably less than the
[First date] So what do you do for a living? "I'm a florist" WHY DON'T YOU LIKE THE FLOOR? WHAT HAS IT DONE TO YOU, IS IT BECAUSE IT'S LAVA?
2 scientists walk into a bar... The first one says "I'll have some H2O", the second one says "I'll have some H2O too". The bartender looks at them and says "Are you two idiots talking about water?"
A man is getting head from his wife... ...and tells her that he wants to cum in her ear. "I'll go deaf!" she says. "Yeah? Well I always cum in your mouth, but you never shut the fuck up!"
Relative elevation in the scale of human worth.  He held at court a rank so high That other noblemen asked why. "Because," 'twas answered, "others lack His skill to scratch the royal back."  Aramis Jukes
You have noticed that the human being is a curiosity. In times past he has had (and worn out and flung away) hundreds and hundreds of religions; today he has hundreds and hundreds of religions, and launches not fewer than three new ones every year. I could enlarge that number and still be within the facts.
Why do we tell actors to "break a leg"? Because in the theater of life, sometimes the only applause you'll get is from the ambulance crew after you've tripped over your own ambition.
DOG 911: What's your emer- DOG: HE THREW A BALL BUT I CAN'T FIND IT DOG 911: He still holding it? DOG: YES! HOW'D HE FETCH IT BEFORE ME??
I'm really good at writing palindromes where the 2nd half is gibberishhsirebbig si flah dn2 eht erehw semordnilap gnitirw ta doog yllaer m'I
I work in retail, a married man made me laugh Me: Hi sir, can I help you? Him: Nah I'm just looking for my wife Me: Oh sorry, we don't sell wives here Him: Good! Else you'd get a lot of returns!
A hollow edifice erected for the habitation of man, rat, mouse, beetle, cockroach, fly, mosquito, flea, bacillus and microbe. _House of Correction_, a place of reward for political and personal service, and for the detention of offenders and appropriations. _House of God_, a building with a steeple and a mortgage on it. _House-dog_, a pestilent beast kept on domestic premises to insult persons passing by and app
I just got the biggest idea for a joke! Then I realized it was my dick. No seriously check this one out: "I dont want to sound like an asshole, but ppfdrtrrtrt *fartnoises*"
The deadliest Knock Knock joke... [PERSON 1] Knock knock [PERSON 2] Who's there? [PERSON 1] You know... [PERSON 2] You know who [PERSON 2] AVADA KEDAVRA!!!
I overcooked some pasta earlier - it got all soggy and mushy. Making the best of a bad situation, I put it in a mug and tried to down it. I soon gave up though - it was an act of *Fusilli Tea*.
[SPELLING BEE] JUDGE: Bourgeoisie ME: Really? W o w JUDGE: *annoyed* Sir, the word is Bourgeoisie ME:*clears throat* Eff - U - See - Kay - U
A plague that would have softened down the hoar austerity of Pharaoh's heart and persuaded him to dismiss Israel with his best wishes, cat-quick.  Lo! the poor humorist, whose tortured mind See jokes in crowds, though still to gloom inclined-- Whose simple appetite, untaught to stray, His brains, renewed by night, consumes by day. He thinks, admitted to an equal sty, A graceful hog would bear his company.  Alexander Poke
The First Person of the literary Trinity, the Second and Third being Custom and Conventionality.  Imbued with a decent reverence for this Holy Triad an industrious writer may hope to produce books that will live as long as the fashion.
An imaginary delightful country which the ancients foolishly believed to be inhabited by the spirits of the good.  This ridiculous and mischievous fable was swept off the face of the earth by the early Christians--may their souls be happy in Heaven!
A man rushes into a bar and yells out, "Guys I just heard the funniest pole joke!" And the bartender says, "Hold up there buddy, Im a pole" And the man replies, "Okay, then I will tell it slowly"
A man and a boy were walking in the woods... A man and a boy were walking in the woods. The little boy says "I'm scared," and the man replies "How do you think I feel? I have to walk back alone."
No, he would not have it so; he would save half a dozen and try the race over again. He was not able to foresee that it would go rotten again, for he is only the Far-Sighted One in his advertisements.
My favorite music-related limerick A tutor who taught on the flute, tried to teach two young tooters to toot. Said the two to the tutor, "Is it harder to toot or, to tutor two tooters to toot?"
Two in one **Dude**: My IQ is absolutely massive! **Guy**: IQ is a representation of your matriarchal heritage? **Dude**: Clever.. maybe my IQ that big after all **Guy**: Ah, *patriarchal* heritage!
The whole theory of modern education is radically unsound. Fortunately, in England, at any rate, education produces no effect whatsoever. If it did it would prove a serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of violence in Grosvenor Square.
If I ever have a son... I'm going to name him Bashun. And whenever our butler is unable to find him in the house he'll call out at the top of his voice, "Master Bashun! Master Bashun where are you?"
An act whereby a sovereign attests his sense of the high temperature of the throne.  Poor Isabella's dead, whose abdication Set all tongues wagging in the Spanish nation. For that performance 'twere unfair to scold her: She wisely left a throne too hot to hold her. To History she'll be no royal riddle-- Merely a plain parched pea that jumped the griddle.  G.J.
A composition in verse, in which, without employing any of the methods of humor, the writer aims to produce in the reader's mind the dampest kind of dejection.  The most famous English example begins somewhat like this:  The cur foretells the knell of parting day; The loafing herd winds slowly o'er the lea; The wise man homeward plods; I only stay To fiddle-faddle in a minor key.
3yr old: [whispering] I have a secret "What it is, sweetie?" 3: [shouting] I POOPED! "Do you know what a secret is?" 3: [whispering] no.
Teacher: Why are you late!? Me: There was a man who lost a $100 bill..Teacher: That's nice. Were you helping him look for it? Me: No, I was standing on it until he fucked off.
I was searching for the end of the line. I tap a guy on the shoulder and ask, "excuse me sir, are you the last person in line?" Dude turns around, looks at me funny and goes, "no, you are."
A female weight lifter went to the doctor "Doc, I've been takin steroids for a few years now and as a side effect, I've grown a Penis" "Anabolic"? Asked the doctor. "Nope just a Penis" she replied.
Three old deaf men on a train in London Deaf man number one says 'IS THIS WEMBLEY?' The second man replies 'NO IT'S THURSDAY.' and the third man replies 'ME TO. LETS GET OFF AND HAVE A PINT'
A blonde is taking money out of an ATM, when the blonde behind her in line says, "Ha! Ha! I know your password. It's four asterisks." The first blonde replies, "Ha! Ha! No it's not. It's 3862."
"BRING ME THE FOETUS' OF 3 CHICKENS" *Maniacal stare* "Listen dude, its called an omelette,a 3 egg omelette" "AND THE BLOOD OF 4 ORANGES"
Thief: Did u see me rob this bank?nTeller: well, yes!nn*Teller shot in the head*nThief: DID U SEE ME ROB THIS BANK?nMe: No. But my wife did!
This is a haiku. This is really a haiku. This is not a haiku. --- --- --- ^^^Edit: ^^^missed ^^^a ^^^word ^^^and ^^^almost ^^^ruined ^^^it.
Dog &amp; Mosquito were in Love .. mosquito kissed the dog .. Dog became emotional...gave Love bite to mosquito . Mosquito died of Rabies &amp; Dog died of Dengue . MORAL:- LOVE is DANGEROUS
After sex, a lot of people like to smoke a cigarette. As a gay man, me and my boyfriend smoke weed after sex. After all, in the bible it says "if a man lies with another man, he should be stoned."
Very particularly abstruse and consummately occult. The ancient philosophies were of two kinds,--_exoteric_, those that the philosophers themselves could partly understand, and _esoteric_, those that nobody could understand.  It is the latter that have most profoundly affected modern thought and found greatest acceptance in our time.
You wanna know why me and my wife don't see eye to eye anymore after 26 years of marriage? She lost her legs so we're no longer the same height. edit: I'm sorry, I thought this was /r/antijokes
If M. Night Shyamalan told a knock-knock joke. * Knock knock. * "Who's there?" * "M. Night Shyamalan." * "M. Night Shyamalan who?" * "Nah, I'm just messing with you. I was inside the whole time."
[furniture store] Wife: We're putting in a bar. Salesman: OK Wife: And... S: Yes? W: Go ahead, say it. Me: WE'RE GONNA NEED A STOOL SAMPLE.
Amish Hooker What's an Amish Hooker do? Ten Mennonite! (Mennonite link on the front page made me think of this one.) edit: I accidentally a ")", but I'm getting a kick out of the weird comments. :-)
I was chatting up this woman. I said, "You're the sort of woman I could introduce to my mum." "Aww," she smiled, "Can you?" I said, "Of course, I'll drive us to the cemetery tomorrow."
A sentiment, or frame of mind, induced by the erroneous belief that one thing is better than another.  An ancient philosopher, expounding his conviction that life is no better than death, was asked by a disciple why, then, he did not die. "Because," he replied, "death is no better than life."  It is longer.
Nietzsche's idea of eternal recurrence suggests we live our lives over and over. Contemporary philosophers argue that this is just a fancy way to describe binge-watching TV series where nothing really changes after the first season.
To celebrate with an appropriate ceremony the maturity of a command.  His right to govern me is clear as day, My duty manifest to disobey; And if that fit observance e'er I shut May I and duty be alike undone.  Israfel Brown   DISSEMBLE, v.i.  To put a clean shirt upon the character. Let us dissemble.  Adam
So this joke crossed the line in a group I tell "Offensive Jokes" to every week. Is it? Can you top it? NSFW / NSFL How do you titty fuck a 7 year old? *Snap her shoulders.*
MOTHER PIG: What did you learn in school today? FIRST PIGLET: Oink! Oink! SECOND PIGLET: Oink! Oink!  THIRD PIGLET: Woof! Woof! MOTHER PIG: What? THIRD PIGLET: I'm taking a foreign language.
Couple kissing on the road A Kid On His Way To Home With His Mom Saw A Couple Kissing On The Road, He Suddenly Shouted &amp; Said: Look Mom look, that boy and girl Are Fighting For A Chewing GUM.
Wife was in ICU Doctor: She is in a coma. Husband: Please save her. She's just 30. *Just then, ECG starts beeping. Fingers move. Her lips mumbled... And she spoke: I'm 29
If it takes 150 yards of stewed tripe to make a pair of leather britches for a bull, how long does it take for a double breasted cockroach to climb a bar of soft soap? You tell me and we'll both know.
Him: Ha! I got your ATM card. Me: So? You'll never guess my PIN. Him: Is it 6969? Me:.. Him:. Me:.. Him:. Me: Seriously dude, give it back.
Girlfriend Joke - Written by Me I was in the shower with my girlfriend the other day and I asked her, "Have you ever been peed on in the shower?" She said, "NO!" I said, "Yes, Yes you have!"
INSTANT KARMA, Get in on the front page gold rush; "are jokes" reddit is a faggot... ...2Bcunt in you'ld (you would love it) (to (too) be continued))...
Three beautiful goddesses, Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosyne, who attended upon Venus, serving without salary.  They were at no expense for board and clothing, for they ate nothing to speak of and dressed according to the weather, wearing whatever breeze happened to be blowing.
Misty's boss says to her: "You've been late to work for 5 days straight! You know what this means, don't you?" ..... ...to which Misty replied "I SURE do! It means today must be FRIDAY!!!"
In North-European mythology, a dwarfish imp inhabiting the interior parts of the earth and having special custody of mineral treasures.  Bjorsen, who died in 1765, says gnomes were common enough in the southern parts of Sweden in his boyhood, and he frequently saw them scampering on the hills in the evening twilight.  Ludwig Binkerhoof saw three as recently as 1792, in the Black Forest, and Sneddeker avers that in 1803 they
A pedophile and a child go into the woods It's dark and raining. The boy looks up to the man and says, "I'm scared!" The man replies, "You're scared? I'm gonna have to walk out of here alone!"
What's the difference between yogurt and semen? ~~Semen~~ Yogurt, dammit! I meant *yogurt* doesn't hit the back of your partner's throat at 30 MPH. \* I always mess up punchlines when I'm drunk!
An ecclesiastical dignitary one point holier than a bishop.  If I were a jolly archbishop, On Fridays I'd eat all the fish up-- Salmon and flounders and smelts; On other days everything else.  Jodo Rem
A Doctor gives his patient the bad news that he only has a week to live... Patient - "No, I don't accept that! I'd like an alternative fact please" Doctor - "Money-wise, you are now set for life"
Here's my favorite limerick. There once was a man from Nantuckett Whose dick was so long he could suck it Wiping cum from his chin He said with a grin If my ear was a pussy, I'd fuck it!
Wanna hear the best knock knock joke? Yes? Okay, but you gotta start off. * You: okay... knock knock. * Me: Who's there? * You: ... * Me: .. * You: ....... * Me: thats the joke, fool.
"Hell no!" A man and woman are riding up in an elevator. The man looks at the woman and says, "Can I smell your pussy?" She replies, "Hell no!" The man says, "Well, it must be your feet then."
Mandy was applying for a summer job. 'How old are you?' asked the owner of the store. 'I'm twelve years old Sir' answered Mandy. 'And what do you expect to be when you grow up ?' 'Twenty one Sir.'
A pirate walks into a bar... A pirate walks into a bar with a ship's wheel hanging from his crotch. Someone asks "what is that on you?" He responds, "Arrr, I've no idea, but it's drivin' me nuts!"
FWD: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: Fwd: THE DOGS HAVE LEARNED HOW TO EMAIL THIS IS YOUR DOG HELLO SUSAN
[zoo] ME: Haha...this one's face! WIFE: Tha- M [bangs on glass] W: Stop it M [pulls funny face] W [elbows me aside] So sorry, 2 tickets pls
One of the sauces which serve the French in place of a state religion.  ME, pro.  The objectionable case of I.  The personal pronoun in English has three cases, the dominative, the objectionable and the oppressive.  Each is all three.
SOUND GUY: [taps microphone] this is a test, testing, testing...1, 2, 3.. MICROPHONE: [sweatig profusley] OH GOD, UH. FOUR?!! FOUR, IS IT FOUR
A robber walks into a bank... ...and shouts "This is a fuck up!", The bank teller say's "Don't you mean a hold up?" to which the robber replies "No its a fuck up, I left my gun in the car!"
The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheer terror. We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbours with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us. We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find good qualities in the high-wayman in the hope that he may spare our pockets. I have the greatest contempt for optimism.
Among the Greeks a coffin which being made of a certain kind of carnivorous stone, had the peculiar property of devouring the body placed in it.  The sarcophagus known to modern obsequiographers is commonly a product of the carpenter's art.
A kid goes up to his dad with a question... "Dad, can I ask you something?" "Of course." "You and mom are both white, but I'm black. Why?" "That party was so wild, it's a wonder you don't bark."
With Zyan Malik leaving 1D.. *zyan malik or whatever leaves 1d. *Kayne West gets in. *kicks everyone out of the band. *there's room for only 1 direction homie. *it's West.
PSYCHATRIST: wat do u see ME: a rorschach test PSYCHATRIST: and this one? ME: a inkblot used to test my psyche PSYCHATRIST: (starts sweatig)
DOG: woof ME: you wanna go outside? DOG: [wagging tail] woof woof! ME: ok just a second DOG: [pulls a gun] woof [gestures to door] woof
The outward and visible sign of an inward fear.  He saw a ghost. It occupied--that dismal thing!-- The path that he was following. Before he'd time to stop and fly, An earthquake trifled with the eye That saw a ghost. He fell as fall the early good; Unmoved that awful vision stood. The stars that danced before his ken He wildly brushed away, and then He saw a post.  Jared Macphester   Accounting for the uncommon behavior of
Saw It Of all the saws that I have seen saw, I never saw a saw saw like this saw saws. If you go thru Arkansas and see a saw that can out-saw the saw that I saw saw, I'd like to see that saw saw!
The natural and rational gauge and measure of respectability, the commonly accepted standards being artificial, arbitrary and fallacious; for, as "Sir Sycophas Chrysolater" in the play has justly remarked, "the true use and function of property (in whatsoever it consisteth--coins, or land, or houses, or merchant-stuff, or anything which may be named as holden of right to one's own subservience) as also of honors, titles, preferments
The story of the upvote DAT SHAT be unin a gut tiiime we needsa usa deaa oopvote us a doonvote n all da boom world bee hap hap@#! Der viginia is a centurfuge of paap!@#$%^&amp;*()_+
The new AI home assistant doesn't just control your lights and music; it now judges your life choices based on your search history. It keeps reminding you about the benefits of kale while you're ordering your third pizza of the week.
2 integrals are working out at the gym One asks the other 'What are you doing today?' 2: 'Well, I think I can really push my limits' 1: 'Oh right, are you sure?' 2: 'I'm definite'.
I, Ceasar, when I heard of the name... I, Ceasar, when I heard of the name Of Cleopatra, I straightaway laid claim. Ahead of my legions, she conquered my regions, I saw, I conquered, I came.
A friend tried to trip me up in an Indian restaurant, failed, and fell face first in to someone's mild chicken dish. I call it instant korma. I don't care if you like it, I can tikka or leave it.
Columbus didn't set out to prove the Earth was round; he was actually looking for the best spot to open a chain of Italian restaurants. His real discovery? The New World was not ready for his pizza recipes.
A man walks into a bar with Harambe Bartender: What can I get you ? Harambe: I'll have a beer. Man: No, he'll have just ice. Bartender: Just ice? Man: Yes, justice for Harambe.
*dinosaur at zoo roars at me* "ROAR" whoa wat kimd of dinosaur is this "GROWL" hmm "SHOUT" hmmm "YELL" hmmmmm "HOLLER" oh its a thesaurus"
To influence a person is to give him one's own soul. He does not think his natural thoughts or burn with his natural passions. His virtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed. He becomes an echo of someone else's music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him.
20 years ago we had Johnny Cash, Bob Hope, and Steve Jobs. Now we have no Cash, no Hope, and no Jobs. Please, do not let Kevin Bacon die. Source: The Bluegrass Grill and Bakery in Charlottesville, VA.
A blackguard whose faulty vision sees things as they are, not as they ought to be.  Hence the custom among the Scythians of plucking out a cynic's eyes to improve his vision.     D   DAMN, v.  A word formerly much used by the Paphlagonians, the meaning of which is lost.  By the learned Dr. Dolabelly Gak it is believed to have been a term of satisfaction, implying the highest
Do Not Be Racist ..... Do not be racist; be like Mario. He's an Italian plumber, who was made by the Japanese, speaks English, looks like a Mexican, jumps like a black man, and grabs coins like a Jew
[ouija board] "helo??" YOUR... SPIRIT... "shh its working" WILL... APPEAR... "omg" AFTER... THIS... AD... "dude why didnt u pay for this ouija board??!"
A creature thoughtfully created to supply occasion for the following lines by the illustrious Ambat Delaso:   TO MY PET TORTOISE   My friend, you are not graceful--not at all; Your gait's between a stagger and a sprawl.  Nor are you beautiful:  your head's a snake's To look at, and I do not doubt it aches.  As to your feet, they'd make an angel weep. 'Tis true you
Principal: Do you do your homework? Kid: Now & Then Principal: Where do you do it? Kid: Here & There Principal: Put him in the closet!!! Kid: Hey When will I get out? Principal: Oh sooner or later
Pity Poor Peter I feel sorry for my friend Peter. His hair's a mess. His family's nuts. His neighbor's an asshole. On bad days, his girlfriend's a c---. And his owner beats him. EDIT: Punctuation.
How to fall down stairs: Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Step 6: Step 7: Step 8: Step 9: Step 10: Step 11: Step 12: Step 13: Step 14: Step 15: Step 16: Step 17: Step 18: Step 19: Step 20:
Two bros are sitting on a fence. A cute girl walks by who just moved into their apartment building. **Bro 1:** "Bro, im gonna hit that." **Bro 2:** "Like a stormtrooper bro." **Bro 1:** "Bro."
little son knows How to scare parents? Dad: "Can I see your report card, son?" Son: "I don't have it." Dad: "Why?" Son: "I gave it to my friend. He wanted to scare his parents."
a muslim couple goes hunting and accidentally shot an ape. "ouch, that's a shame. can we eat him so he wouldn't die in vain?" said the girl. "no, we cant" the guy replied. "why?" "it's Haram, Bae"
A man who moralises is usually a hypocrite, and a woman who moralises is invariably plain. There is nothing in the whole world so unbecoming to a woman as a nonconformist conscience. And most women know it, I am glad to say.
3 in 1 QA jokes Q: What does a nosey pepper do? A: Gets jalapeno business! Q: What do you call a fake noodle? A: An Impasta Q: What do you call an alligator in a vest? A: An Investigator
A Russian, visiting the USA, went for an eye check up. The Doctor shows the letters on the board: CZWXNQSTAZKY Doctor: Can you read this ? Russian: Read ??? I even know the guy, he's my cousin.
Energetically to belabor with a verbal slap-stick.  This is an operation which in literature, particularly in the drama, is commonly fatal to the victim.  Nevertheless, the liability to a cursing is a risk that cuts but a small figure in fixing the rates of life insurance.
*T-Rex stubs his toe* OUCH I'M SO MAD. JUST... MAD. I'M... "Angry? Agitated? Irritated? Anno-" SHUT UP THESAURUS NO ONE ASKED YOU.
Relationship Joke A man asks his wife, "What would you do if I won the lottery?" His wife says, "Take half and leave your ass!" The man replies, "Great! I won 12 bucks, here is six, now get out!"
An archaeologist notices his partner appears to be nibbling a fossil... Curious, he walks over and asks, "What you got there?" "Not sure", replies the fellow, "But you have got to try-a-lil'-bite!"
"I'm giving a 'surprised' birthday party  for you." "A 'surprised'. birthday party? What's that?"  "That's where I invite a bunch of your friends and if any of them  come I'll be surprised!"
What's his name? A man walks into a bedroom and sees a hot, naked woman lying face-down on the bed. Q: What's his name? A: Willie Turner Q: What's *her* name? A: Betty Will
I didn't feel right so I went to the doctor. He only takes one look at me and says, "Well son, I'm afraid you're going to have to stop masturbating." "Why?" I asked. "So I can examine you."
Q: Why was Heisenberg such a bad lover? A: When he got the momentum, he couldn't find the position, and when he found the position, he couldn't muster up the momentum. **X-post : /r/ScienceHumour**
A chicken crosses the road... ..and meets 007 on the other side. "What's your name?" Asks the chicken. "Bond, James Bond," Says 007. "And how about you?" "Ken," Says the chicken. "Chic Ken."
A guy walks into a bar and sees a sign that reads... Sandwich: $5.00 Handjob: $10.00 Repost a joke the next day: 1500 up votes Now, please, wash your hands and make me a sandwich.
Do u know whats A B C D E F G? A Boy Can Do Everything For Girl Now reverse da order, can u guess the full form of: G F E D C B A ? Girls Forgets Everything Done &amp; Catches(new) Boy Again.
I woke up went for a walk my head fell off  and rolled away. I picked it up and put it on. A child walked up to me  and said: "Good grief where are your feet?" I must have left them in bed !
Hideously appareled after the manner of the time and place.  In Boorioboola-Gha a man is presentable on occasions of ceremony if he have his abdomen painted a bright blue and wear a cow's tail; in New York he may, if it please him, omit the paint, but after sunset he must wear two tails made of the wool of a sheep and dyed black.  PRESIDE, v.  To guide the action of a deliberative body to
My friend overheard me saying I could go for some malt liquor. Instead, the bastard got me a box of Whoppers. "What the hell is this?!" I said. "Suck on them. Now, you're a *malt licker*!"
Mommy, they call me nymphomaniac at school... -Don't worry Lissa, it's just kid's stuff. Now you go to sleep before dark, or the Boogeyman will come at eat you. -Yeah! He should come and eat my pussy!
NSFW: "Do you spit or swallow?" I was out on a date with this girl, when I asked her, "Do you spit or swallow?"   She slapped my face and stormed off... I'm never taking anyone to wine tasting again!!
You've got penis [Cast: a man and a woman.] Woman/man: [bump into each other.] Woman: You've got penis in my vagina. Man: You've got vagina in my penis woman/man: [moan]
WHAT DO WE WANT?!?!! WHAT DO WE WANT?!?!? LOW FLYING AIRPLANE NOISES!!! WHEN DO WE WANT EM?!?!? *NEEEEEYYYYOOOOOOOOWWWW* Edit: Wow, this really took off.
My 5-year-old daughter hates it when I call her the "C" word... cranky. She starts crying, screaming and stomping around. It's at this point I have to tell her: "Stop acting like a little cunt!"
The art of thinking and reasoning in strict accordance with the limitations and incapacities of the human misunderstanding.  The basic of logic is the syllogism, consisting of a major and a minor premise and a conclusion--thus:  _Major Premise_:  Sixty men can do a piece of work sixty times as quickly as one man.  _Minor Premise_:  One man can dig a posthole in sixty seconds; therefore--  _Conclusion_:  Sixty men
Its Valentines Day...If u r married go & kiss your wife or husband , if u have a gfbf ..do the same ..n if u r single ,,,,kiss the ground and thank GOD !! =)). HAPPY VALENTINES DAY
One of a race of persons who lived before the division of labor had been carried to such a pitch of differentiation, and who followed the primitive economic maxim, "Every man his own horse."  The best of the lot was Chiron, who to the wisdom and virtues of the horse added the fleetness of man.  The scripture story of the head of John the Baptist on a charger shows that pagan myths have somewhat sophisticated sacred history.
Less conspicuously admirable than one's ancestors. The contemporaries of Homer were striking examples of degeneracy; it required ten of them to raise a rock or a riot that one of the heroes of the Trojan war could have raised with ease.  Homer never tires of sneering at "men who live in these degenerate days," which is perhaps why they suffered him to beg his bread--a marked instance of returning good for evil, by the way, for if they had forbidden him he would certainly have
Comeback I was talking with my friend the other day when he said, "You know, I'm sick of all the times people use 'your mum' as a comeback. It's old, cheap, and overused." I said, "So's your mum."
And you will remember that in the case of Adam's posterity all the billions are innocent -- none of them had a share in his offense, but the Deity holds them guilty to this day. None gets off, except by acknowledging that guilt -- no cheaper lie will answer.
WAy back in the day Canada was originally called CND So America calls CND and asks them to spell it so they know what to write on their maps. The guy from CND replies, "C eh, N eh, D eh."
A suspension of hostilities against a sentenced assassin, to enable the Executive to determine whether the murder may not have been done by the prosecuting attorney.  Any break in the continuity of a disagreeable expectation.  Altgeld upon his incandescent bed Lay, an attendant demon at his head.  "O cruel cook, pray grant me some relief-- Some respite from the roast, however brief."  "Remember how on earth I pardoned all Your friends in Illinois when held in thrall
An infinite number of mathematicians walks into a bar... The first order 1 beer, the second 2 beers, the third 3, and so on... The bartender doesn't pour anything and say "Yall own me 1/12 of a beer"
Friendship, n. An alliance formed in mutual desperation for companionship, where each party agrees to tolerate the other's flaws in exchange for someone to share the silence of loneliness. It's a bond where you endure endless stories about someone's cats or exes, knowing they'll do the same for your tales of woe.
BRUCE JENNER CHANGE OVER WHEN BRUCE JENNER FINISHES HIS CHANGE OVER IN BECOMING A WOMAN, OUT OF CURIOSITY (WINK WINK) I'D LIKE TO SEE HOW BIG HIS ASS IS GOING TO BE
A Pirate Walks into a Bar A pirate walks into a bar with a steering wheel in his pants. The bartender says, "Are you aware that there is a steering wheel in your pants?" "ARRR IT'S DRIVIN' ME NUTS."
chinaman goes to see the eye doctor so a chinaman goes to see and eye doctor, having problems seeing. doctor says "ah i see the problem, youve got a cataract" chinaman says "no i drive a rincorn"
Anybody can be good in the country. There are no temptations there. That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilised. Civilisation is not by any means an easy thing to attain to. There are only two ways by which man can reach it. One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt. Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate.
[NSFW] A Jelly Baby goes to the Doctor... Jelly Baby: "Doctor, Doctor, my penis has gone black." Doctor: "What have you been doing?!" Jelly Baby: "I don't know... Fucking allsorts!"
Specifically, a cave-dweller of the paleolithic period, after the Tree and before the Flat.  A famous community of troglodytes dwelt with David in the Cave of Adullam.  The colony consisted of "every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented"--in brief, all the Socialists of Judah.
A doctor, an Englishman, a lawyer, an Irishman, a priest, a Scotsman, a cop, a midget, a fireman and a blonde walk into a bar.... The bartender says, "What is this, some kind of joke?"
Doc said I need to change my diet... He said I need to eat more caviar and drink more champagne. I said, "Doc, that's crazy! What's this diet called?" He said, "it's a High Fluten diet."
"We should see other people" PIGEON: coo "It's not u it's me" - coo "I'm breaking up w/ u" - coo "I'm sleeping w/ ur brother" - not coo
A fine and costly residence, particularly that of a great official.  The residence of a high dignitary of the Christian Church is called a palace; that of the Founder of his religion was known as a field, or wayside.  There is progress.
Give a man a fish... ...and feed him for one meal. Teach a man to fish, feed him for a lifetime. Give a man a fire, he stays warm for a few hours. Set a man on fire and he stays warm for a lifetime.
Not conforming to standard. In matters of thought and conduct, to be independent is to be abnormal, to be abnormal is to be detested. Wherefore the lexicographer adviseth a striving toward the straiter resemblance of the Average Man than he hath to himself. Whoso attaineth thereto shall have peace, the prospect of death and the hope of Hell.
My wife came home one day... ... to find me doing her sister up the arse. "How could you do this to me?" she cried. I responded, "Well, I can't. That's why I'm doing it to her."
How do you spell me? "M E." "No you forgot the D." "There's no D in me." "Not yet." It's a classic, my friend got me with this right after I got him with the "duck weigh".
A fool who, having property of his own, undertakes to become responsible for that entrusted to another to a third.  Philippe of Orleans wishing to appoint one of his favorites, a dissolute nobleman, to a high office, asked him what security he would be able to give.  "I need no bondsmen," he replied, "for I can give you my word of honor."  "And pray what may be the value of that?" inquired the amused Regent.  "
A pony walks into a bar and in a soft and raspy voice says to the bartender, Gimme a beer. The bartender says, Sure buddy, sounds like you got a cough. The pony replies, I'm a little hoarse.
New job. A nigerian man got a job at US, on his first day he shows up late for work. His boss yells, "You should have been here at 8.30!" The man replies, "Why? What happened at 8.30?"
Cleopatra wasn't just known for her beauty; she was also the first influencer, using the Nile River for her famous 'boat selfies'. Her marketing strategy was so effective, she even turned a snake bite into a legendary exit strategy.
A husband says to his wife... "What would you do if I won the lottery?". She replied "I'd take half, then leave you." "Excellent!", he retorted, "I won 12, here's 6, now fuck off".
One who serves his country by residing abroad, yet is not an ambassador.  An English sea-captain being asked if he had read "The Exile of Erin," replied:  "No, sir, but I should like to anchor on it."  Years afterwards, when he had been hanged as a pirate after a career of unparalleled atrocities, the following memorandum was found in the ship's log that he had kept at the time of his reply:  Aug. 3d, 1842.
There is nothing so absolutely pathetic as a really fine paradox. The pun is the clown among jokes, the well-turned paradox is the polished comedian, and the highest comedy verges upon tragedy, just as the keenest edge of tragedy is often tempered by a subtle humour. Our minds are shot with moods as a fabric is shot with colours, and our moods often seem inappropriate. Everything that is true is inappropriate.
A husband and a wife sit at the table, having dinner... ...The woman drops a bit of tomato sauce on her white top. "Och, I look like a pig!" The man nods, "And you dropped tomato sauce on your top!"
He willed away his whole estate, And then in death he fell asleep, Murmuring:  "Well, at any rate, My name unblemished I shall keep." But when upon the tomb 'twas wrought Whose was it?--for the dead keep naught.  Durang Gophel Arn
DOG 911: What's ur emer- DOG: OWNER IS CATCHIN POKEMON DOG 911: So DOG: HE'S THROWING BALLS BUT I CAN'T FIND THEM DOG 911: OMG DOG: OMG
Which is to say, that as the meek and gentle Savior he was a thousand billion times crueler than ever he was in the Old Testament -- oh, incomparably more atrocious than ever he was when he was at the very worst in those old days!
Boy-Girl Boy: The principal is so dumb! Girl: Do you know who I am? Boy: No... Girl: I am the principal's daughter! Boy: Do you know who I am? Girl: No... Boy: Good! *walks away*
Why are all those people running? A: Why are all those people running? B: They are running a race to get a cup. A: Who will get the cup? B: The person who wins. A: Then why are all the others running?
THAT'S NOT FUNNY, THAT'S SICK! A clown and a little boy are walking through the woods. The boy says "it sure is dark and scary here". The clown says "how do you think I feel? I'm coming back alone".
5 penises A man visits his doctor and tells him, "You've got to help me doc. I've got 5 penises!" To which the doctor replies, "5 penises! How do your pants fit?" "Like a glove!"
A stage for the performance of miracle plays, in which the leading actor is translated to heaven.  In this country the gallows is chiefly remarkable for the number of persons who escape it.  Whether on the gallows high Or where blood flows the reddest, The noblest place for man to die-- Is where he died the deadest.  (Old play)
HR: Me: HR: Me: HR: "..16. 16 STAPLES in Diane's forehead..." Me: HR: Me: "..it was the last twizzler" HR: Me: HR: Me: *eats twizzler*
I wanted the day off work today so I phoned my boss to tell him I was sick... He said "You don't sound sick." I said "I'm fucking my sister, is that sick enough for you?" Well... I got the day off.
The cockatrice.  A sort of serpent hatched from the egg of a cock.  The basilisk had a bad eye, and its glance was fatal. Many infidels deny this creature's existence, but Semprello Aurator saw and handled one that had been blinded by lightning as a punishment for having fatally gazed on a lady of rank whom Jupiter loved.  Juno afterward restored the reptile's sight and hid it in a cave.  Nothing is so well attested by the
A place in which the dead are laid to await the coming of the medical student.  Beside a lonely grave I stood-- With brambles 'twas encumbered; The winds were moaning in the wood, Unheard by him who slumbered,  A rustic standing near, I said: "He cannot hear it blowing!" "'Course not," said he:  "the feller's dead-- He can't hear nowt that's going."  "Too true," I
An ingenious substitute for the chain and whip of the slave-driver.  As, pent in an aquarium, the troutlet Swims round and round his tank to find an outlet, Pressing his nose against the glass that holds him, Nor ever sees the prison that enfolds him; So the poor debtor, seeing naught around him, Yet feels the narrow limits that impound him, Grieves at his debt and studies to evade it, And finds at last he might as well
"They said 'You'll never amount to anything, you aren't handsome enough to be a star, you're too short, you can't sing, you're not funny enough'" "So anyway here's your medium Latte that'll be 3.79"
In honor of his passing, my dad's favorite joke to tell waiters Waiter: "And to drink, sir?" Dad: "I'll have a blind coke." Waiter: "I'm sorry?" Dad: "You know, a blind coke. No ice."
The chief of Grecian gods, adored by the Romans as Jupiter and by the modern Americans as God, Gold, Mob and Dog.  Some explorers who have touched upon the shores of America, and one who professes to have penetrated a considerable distance to the interior, have thought that these four names stand for as many distinct deities, but in his monumental work on Surviving Faiths, Frumpp insists that the natives are monotheists, each having no other god than himself,
I introduced my new girlfriend to my family last night... "This is my dad Roger," I said, "And this is my twin brother Dave." "Nice to meet you," she smiled. "Who's the oldest?" I said, "My dad."
*interrogating cat* Admit it! You're a Communist! "Meow" A no-good red! "Meow" Tough guy eh? "Meow" We can do this all night. "Mao" Youwait
The point in the heavens directly overhead to a man standing or a growing cabbage.  A man in bed or a cabbage in the pot is not considered as having a zenith, though from this view of the matter there was once a considerably dissent among the learned, some holding that the posture of the body was immaterial.  These were called Horizontalists, their opponents, Verticalists.  The Horizontalist heresy was finally extinguished by Xanobus, the philosopher-king of Ab
To renounce an honor for an advantage.  To renounce an advantage for a greater advantage.  'Twas rumored Leonard Wood had signed A true renunciation Of title, rank and every kind Of military station-- Each honorable station.  By his example fired--inclined To noble emulation, The country humbly was resigned To Leonard's resignation-- His Christian resignation.  Politian Greame
The Period of Possibility, when Archimedes finds a fulcrum, Cassandra has a following and seven cities compete for the honor of endowing a living Homer.  Youth is the true Saturnian Reign, the Golden Age on earth again, when figs are grown on thistles, and pigs betailed with whistles and, wearing silken bristles, live ever in clover, and cows fly over, delivering milk at every door, and Justice never is heard to snore
Joke from my daughter Her: Why did the chicken cross the road? Me: Why? Her: To get to the ugly guy's house. Me:??? Her: Knock knock Me: Who's there? Her: It's the chicken!
When we were vacationing in New Zealand, I bought myself a back-scratcher made from a Kangaroo claw. ... ... The only downside is when I use it on myself, I end up feeling jumpy the rest of the day.
My girlfriend left a note on the fridge door... It said, "this is not working. I'm going to my mothers." I opened the door. The light came on. The beer was cold. Just what in the hell did she mean?
In an English court a man named Home was tried for slander in having accused his neighbor of murder.  His exact words were:  "Sir Thomas Holt hath taken a cleaver and stricken his cook upon the head, so that one side of the head fell upon one shoulder and the other side upon the other shoulder."  The defendant was acquitted by instruction of the court, the learned judges holding that the words did not charge murder, for they did not affirm the death of the cook, that being
Words designed to show that the person of whom they are uttered is devoid of the dignity of character distinguishing him who utters them.  It may be graphic, mimetic or merely rident. Shaftesbury is quoted as having pronounced it the test of truth--a ridiculous assertion, for many a solemn fallacy has undergone centuries of ridicule with no abatement of its popular acceptance. What, for example, has been more valorously derided than the doctrine of Infant Respectability?
A senior partner with a herniated disc limps into a conference room Coworker 1: "I feel like the world's moving in slow motion" (pause) Coworker 1: "Oh wait, it's just Charlie" (motions at partner)
IF I HAD A NICKLE EVERY TIME A GOP OFFICIAL CALLED TRUMP'S BEHAVIOR "UNACCEPTABLE" BUT ACCEPTED HIM AS NOMINEE I COULD START A FAKE COLLEGE
He concedes that God has made the angels perfect, without blemish, and immune from pain and death, and that he could have been similarly kind to man if he had wanted to, but denies that he was under any moral obligation to do it.
Husband sat in his room throwing darts.... at his wife's photo but not even a single one hit the target. From another room the wife asks the husband : "What are you doing?" . Husband: "MISSING YOU".
Husband comes home with a duck under his arm. "Look. This is the pig I've been fucking." The wife says, "That's not a pig, that's a duck." The husband says, "I wasn't talking to you."
An apparatus with which we think what we think.  That which distinguishes the man who is content to _be_ something from the man who wishes to _do_ something.  A man of great wealth, or one who has been pitchforked into high station, has commonly such a headful of brain that his neighbors cannot keep their hats on.  In our civilization, and under our republican form of government, brain is so highly honored that it is rewarded by exemption from the cares of office
Man is without any doubt the most interesting fool there is. Also the most eccentric. He hasn't a single written law, in his Bible or out of it, which has any but just one purpose and intention -- to limit or defeat the law of God.
A guy is out to dinner with his wife... Wife: See that drunk guy at the bar? Guy: Yeah, what about him? Wife: He proposed to me 10 years ago, but I turned him down. Guy: Wow! He's STILL celebrating!
The doctor told me to lose some weight. I said, "How?" He said "Don't eat anything fatty." I said, "You mean pies, chips, that sort of thing?" He said, "No, just don't eat anything, fatty."
A magician stopped me in the street. He said, "Think of a number between 1 and 10." I said, "OK." He said, "Have you got one?" I said, "No, not yet. It's only 12.30."
How many amateur masochists does it take to screw in a light bulb? Only one; But it takes a WHOLE E.R. room to extract it afterwards. Double joke! "whole... hole." it's a play on words ;)
A woman walks into a grocery store with a duck... A clerk says, "Hey! You can't bring that pig in here!" The woman says, "It's not a pig. It's a duck." The clerk says, "I was talking to the duck."
Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! Shhh! -Librarians arguing
What did one guy at a gay bar say to the other guy? Can I push your stool in? I just wanted to note that my ten year old brother told me this joke.&amp;#3232;\_&amp;#3232;
HADES: Unleash the hell hound! CERBERUS: *sipping tea* I told you to ask first if it's a good time for us. HADES: Is it a-- CERBERUS: No.
A play in which the story is told without violence to the language.  The least disagreeable form of dramatic action.  PARDON, v.  To remit a penalty and restore to the life of crime.  To add to the lure of crime the temptation of ingratitude.
The three different types of rooster What does a rooster say? Cock-a-doodle-doo What does a crazy rooster say? Doodle-doodle-cock What does a Gay rooster say? Any-cockle-do
An original joke about Mathew and Not-Mathew. Me:Mathew and Not-Mathew were on a boat. Mathew fell off the boat. Who was left? You:Not-Mathew. Me:Yeah Mathew was the one who fell out. Idiot.
I went up to a sexy girl in a bar. I said, "Would you like to come back to my place?" "I think you should ask my boyfriend first." she smiled. I said, "No thanks. I'm not gay."
*Playing a ouija board* "Identify yourself" I-T-S A M-E L-U-I-G-I "What the fu-" *Checks box* "Dammit mom, this is a Luigi board!"
I was on the beach with my daughter. After a while, she turned to me and said, "Dad, you look like a lobster." "Oh no," I replied, "Am I burning?" She said, "No. Just very ugly."
(NSFW) A pedophile and a little boy walk into the woods.. The boy says "it's really dark out here, I'm scared." The pedophile looks at him and says "you're scared?! I have to walk back alone!"
Aoccdrnig to Ylae rseaerch, it deosn't mtater waht oredr the ltteers in a wrod are in, the olny iprmoatnt tihng is how mcuh mnoey you hvae
A German got pulled over by the police in France. Police officer: "Name?" German: "Heinrich Klimt" Police officer: "Age?" German: "31" Police officer: "occupation?" German: "No, no. Just visiting"
About 4,000 years ago: God: I shall create a great plague and every living thing on Earth will die! Fish: *Winks at God and slips him a $20 note* God: Correction, I shall create a great flood!
I've had a revelation from God himself! and he told me to share it with you all! It's hmm...ehhh... wait just a second, damn I think I have forgotten it! bah can't have been that important then
I saw a guy holding a TV I was walking down the street, when I saw a black guy holding a TV. I thought "holy shit, is that mine?" I went home to check. But nah, mine was at home polishing my shoes.
It is going to cost a million dollars. He was probably just in the act of contributing that sum when a man pushed in ahead of him -- as usual. Mr. Rockefeller. He furnishes the million, but the credit will go elsewhere -- as usual. This morning's journal tells us something about the hookworm's operations:
if girl is in love - Her parent Ask: Who is that Idiot..? If Boy is in love - His parent Ask: Idiot, Who is that Girl..? Moral :: No matter who ever is in love... Boys Are Always Idiot :P (LOL)
My mother said fetch me a glass of water... My mother said "fetch me a glass of water" and I said "no" my mom said "I bore you for nine months!" So I said "you bore me every time you speak!"
Husband -Talking to wife I have a problem Wife - how many times must i tell you that it is "we," "we have a problem". Husband - Ok, sweetie, we have a problem. My secretary is having our baby
What is the difference between a circus and a whorehouse?[NSFW[ One is an array of cunning stunts and the other is an array of stunning c*nts EDIT: R.I.P. inbox, this really blew up unexpectedly
Rene Descartes walks into a bar. . . . . .and orders a beer. When he finishes is, the barkeep asks "Have another?" Descartes replies "I think not." . . .and POOF. He vanishes.
"You never tell me you love me," said my girlfriend. I said, "That's because you never ask." She said, "Do you want me to?" "Go for it," I replied. She said, "Do you love me?" I said, "No."
A benighted creature who has the folly to worship something that he can see and feel.  According to Professor Howison, of the California State University, Hebrews are heathens.  "The Hebrews are heathens!" says Howison.  He's A Christian philosopher.  I'm A scurril agnostical chap, if you please, Addicted too much to the crime Of religious discussion in my rhyme.  Though Hebrew and Howison cannot agree On a
How many Karma whores does it take to change a lightbulb? [repost] I don't care. I'm just doing this for the upvotes, but I think the other guy said ten... or 500... something like that.
HELLO, 911? I'M FALLING DOWN AN ELEVATOR SHAFT. YES, RIGHT NOW. VERY SLOWLY, THAT'S HOW. HOLD ON, SOMEONE JOINED. WHOA, NOW WE'RE FALLING UP
[spelling bee] Your word is 'effusive' "E-F-F-U-S-I-V-E" That is correct. What was your name? "It's Siv" I know lmao [hi5s other judge]
So a duck walks into a bar... He waddles over to a seat and settles in. The bartender says "Hey there, what can I get for you?" And the duck says "I... I don't know. I've never made it this far."
The Thai Girl One day, I decided to take a bus to work for a change. Seated across the aisle from me was a beuatiful thai girl. I thought to myself, "please don't get an erection". But she did.
I don't mean to brag, but I'm the world champion in false modesty. ^^^^^Yes, ^^^^^I ^^^^^know ^^^^^I ^^^^^already ^^^^^posted ^^^^^this, ^^^^^but ^^^^^the ^^^^^title ^^^^^got ^^^^^"AutoCorrected"
A black kid comes home from elementary school one day... And says, "hey mom, I've got the biggest dick in the third grade! Is that cause I'm black?" She says "no Tyrone, it's cause you're nineteen"
A guy walks into a laundry run by cats. "Excuse  me" he said to the cat in charge "Can you get milk stains out?" "Sure" replied the cat. "We'll have that stain licked in a minute!"
Three logicians walk into a bar The bartender asks: "Do you all want a drink?" The first logician says: "I don't know." The second logician says: "I don't know." The third logician says: "Yes."
A love letter from biscuit maker: Dear marie, today is good day, u r anmol for me... but u have crack jacked my heart, bcoz i have a little heart, now i m in 50/50 position...
There are two cavemen sitting by a fire... One is eating some bugs he found, and he says to the other, "You like beetles?" and his friend says, "No,*CRUNCH CRUNCH*, me more of a stones guy."
[loud bar] Her: I have to urinate Me: What? H: Urinate M: What? H: URINATE! M: Well, YOU'RE a 10! H: Huh? No! You're like a 5. I gotta pee.
Greg wins 25,000,000.00 in the nationally lottery and runs home "Margret, I won the lottery, pack your bags", "why Greg, where are we going?". "I don't care, pack your bags and get out" says Greg.
Me at age 5 "I wish I had a $1" Me at age 10 "I wish I had $100" Me at age 17 "I wish I had $1,000,000" Me at age 26 "I wish I had $1"
A guy calls the hospital and says... "You gotta send help! My wife's going into labor!" The nurse says, "Calm down. Is this her first child?" To which he replies, "No! This is her fucking husband!"
Poor Kids One Day, Charles told his father he was going to the Wishing Well. So he flips a penny into a well, makes a wish, and walks home. "What did you wish for?", Asks the Father. "Another Penny"
The higher they are, the more spaced out they get What do prime numbers and stoners have in common? &amp;nbsp; ^^The ^^punchline ^^need ^^not ^^be ^^always ^^at ^^the ^^end...
I'm not afraid of death; I just don't want to be there when it happens. But let's be honest, if I could avoid my own birthday parties, I'd certainly try to sidestep my own funeral.
[ouija board] Who are you? *board begins spelling* G-R-E-E-N--M-A-R-I-O What the -- a Luigi Board?! W-A-H-O-O--I-T-S-A--M-E
Original &amp; Classic Winston Churchill (not my retort) Lady Astor said to Churchill, "If you were my husband, I'd poison your tea," to which he responded, "Madam, if you were my wife, I'd drink it!"
A spiritual entity concerning which there hath been brave disputation.  Plato held that those souls which in a previous state of existence (antedating Athens) had obtained the clearest glimpses of eternal truth entered into the bodies of persons who became philosophers.  Plato himself was a philosopher.  The souls that had least contemplated divine truth animated the bodies of usurpers and despots.  Dionysius I, who had threatened to decapitate the broad-browed philosopher, was a usurper
An old deity formerly much worshiped under various names. As Baal he was popular with the Phoenicians; as Belus or Bel he had the honor to be served by the priest Berosus, who wrote the famous account of the Deluge; as Babel he had a tower partly erected to his glory on the Plain of Shinar.  From Babel comes our English word "babble."  Under whatever name worshiped, Baal is the Sun-god.  As Beelzeb
AY LMAO's in a bar. Two aliens are sitting in a pub. One of them turns to the other and says, plububulaBBHAJGGIUI@@#GJKG?' The other one replies, Dude, you are seriously shitfaced.'
I was in bed with a girl and she said to me, "I want you to make me scream". So I said, "OK. I'll just go outside, put on a ski mask and then kick your front door in. That usually works."
A woman in labor is in pain and screaming profanity at her husband from her hospital bed. He says, "Hey, don't blame me! I wanted to stick it in your ass, but N-O-O-O-O, you said that might hurt!"
3-year-old girl My 3-year-old niece, stomping her feet in anger, making faces. Me: What's wrong ? 3-year-old: NOTHING! Phew! she's already a woman :-o
Son: "Mom, Dad, I'm gay." Mom: *Stares at Dad* Dad: *Clenches fist* Mom: "Don't!" Dad: *Sweats Profusely* Mom: "..." Dad: "HI GAY, I'M DAD" Edit: Yay top of r/jokes, #lifegoals Also formatting
[INT. STARBUCKS - DAY] Me: Theres a large rat in the bathroom Barista: ? Me: A large rat Barista: ? Me: THERES A VENTI RAT IN THE BATHROOM
AIN'T NO PARTY LIKE A WINDOWS 7 PARTY 'CAUSE A WINDOWS 7 PARTY DON'T STFILE \$win_nt$.~bt\NTKRNLMP.EXE cannot be open error 7
ME: hey guys what's the herps? HIM: u mean haps? M: oh, haha yea. what's the itch?I mean sitch H: uh M: hows it herpin? H: M: I have herpes
Rabinowitz: Whatcha reading? Rabinowitz: Whatcha reading? Topper: Great Expectations. Rabinowitz: Is it any good? Topper: Its not all I hoped for. Hot Shots Part Deux. Best joke in the movie.
BABY: WAAAAAAA- ME: Shhhh, it's okay. BABY: -AAAAAAAA- ME: shhhh.... BABY: -AAAAAALUIGI! ME: wtf BABY: (whispering) No one will believe you.
The general body of what one reads.  In our country it consists, as a rule, of Indiana novels, short stories in "dialect" and humor in slang.  We know by one's reading His learning and breeding; By what draws his laughter We know his Hereafter. Read nothing, laugh never-- The Sphinx was less clever!  Jupiter Muke
I text this girl who was renting a room in my house "I want to lick you out" If she likes the text then I go with it, if not I blame predictive text and it was meant to say "I want to kick you out".
An officer formerly attached to a king's household, whose business it was to amuse the court by ludicrous actions and utterances, the absurdity being attested by his motley costume.  The king himself being attired with dignity, it took the world some centuries to discover that his own conduct and decrees were sufficiently ridiculous for the amusement not only of his court but of all mankind.  The jester was commonly called a fool, but the poets and romancers have ever delighted to represent him as
[at Red Lobster] WAITRESSES: *run toward me* ME: Red Lobster! WAITRESSES: *stop* ME: Green Lobster! WAITRESSES: *run* MANAGER: Okay, SIR...
Science Joke :) Two scientists walk into a bar. Bartender: So what would you two like? Scientist 1: I'll have some H2O. Scientist 2: I'll have some H2O too. (H2O2)
GOD: there, my first animal :) SNAKE:youre not done right? How am I supposed to move? G:like this*shimmies* S: G:just kinda*shimmies* S:dude
I went to see a therapist. I said, "I'm not sure if I'm a man or a woman." He said, "Right. Just pull your pants down for me." I said, "No." He said, "You're a woman."
[1st date] HER: do you like charades? MIME: [thumbs up] HER: well? MIME: [nodding 'yes'] HER: hello? MIME: [shooting self with finger gun]
I FEEL SO ALIVE MCDONALD'S IS GIVING AWAY FREE COFFEE I PASSED 20 MCDONALD'S TODAY DO THE MATH TOO LATE I DID THE MATH SLEEP IS FOR MORTALS
Pertaining to a certain order of architecture, otherwise known as the Normal American.  Most of the public buildings of the United States are of the Ramshackle order, though some of our earlier architects preferred the Ironic.  Recent additions to the White House in Washington are Theo-Doric, the ecclesiastic order of the Dorians.  They are exceedingly fine and cost one hundred dollars a brick.
The place whereupon the priest formerly raveled out the small intestine of the sacrificial victim for purposes of divination and cooked its flesh for the gods.  The word is now seldom used, except with reference to the sacrifice of their liberty and peace by a male and a female tool.  They stood before the altar and supplied The fire themselves in which their fat was fried. In vain the sacrifice!--no god will claim An offering burnt with an unholy flame.  M.P.
Her text: I'm tanning. Call you when I'm done. My thoughts: SHE'S NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED NAKED
I went to this new doctor, but he was terrible... All he did was suck blood from my neck. Do not go see Dr. Acula. [](/lunalaugh)Credit goes to Mr. Hedberg for this one.
The man who went to the bar with a gun. A man comes in a bar with a gun in his hands and yells "Who the hell fucked my wife!?", a voice at the back says "you don't have enough bullets, mate!"
[typing] Me: Is it DISCREET or DISCRETE? Wife: 2nd. Me: Is "polyamorous" hyphenated? Wife: No. Why? Me: It's for work. When's your flight?
"Give it here!" "No, it's mine!" "it's my turn!" "you had it last!" "come on gimme it!" "no way!" "but it's my go!" Siamese twins having a wank.
Honey I won the Lottery. Overly exuberant husband came home. "Honey pack your bags I just won the lottery!" Wife; "Where are we going?". Husband; "We are not going anywhere - get the fuck out!"
Form Corbas En hassas ogunumuz olan Aksam Yemegi bize daha cok agrlk veren ve kilo aldrma ihtimalini en yuksek buldugumuz ogundur.
i NEVER VOTED FOR A PRESiDENT BECUZ iF iM GUNNA WASTE MY GAS THEN iT BETTER BE ON SOMETHiNG iMPORTANT LiKE DRiViNG TO CHiCK-FiL-A
What do you call a cow... What do you call a cow with three legs? *Tri-tip.* What do you call a cow with two legs? *Lean beef.* What do you call a cow with no legs? *Ground beef.*
A crowd; the source of political wisdom and virtue.  In a republic, the object of the statesman's adoration.  "In a multitude of counsellors there is wisdom," saith the proverb.  If many men of equal individual wisdom are wiser than any one of them, it must be that they acquire the excess of wisdom by the mere act of getting together.  Whence comes it?  Obviously from nowhere--as well say that a range of mountains is higher than
The chief of many mechanical devices enabling us to get away from where we are to where we are no better off.  For this purpose the railroad is held in highest favor by the optimist, for it permits him to make the transit with great expedition.
A Cuban just arrived on a raft... And is being interviewed when they ask him Name? "Manolo". Sex? "Two to three times a week" No,no i mean Male or Female? "Well whatever I can get that week"
There were two fish in a tank. There were two fish in a tank. One turns to the other and says, "Do you know how to drive this thing?" How much do pirates pay for their earrings? A buccaneer.
An interior convulsion, producing a distortion of the features and accompanied by inarticulate noises.  It is infectious and, though intermittent, incurable.  Liability to attacks of laughter is one of the characteristics distinguishing man from the animals-- these being not only inaccessible to the provocation of his example, but impregnable to the microbes having original jurisdiction in bestowal of the disease.  Whether laughter could be imparted to animals by inoculation from the human patient is a question that
What did the burger say to the other burger? "Aw man, it's my big moment, I'm getting served to someone! I hope I don't *ham* it up!" The other burger looks at him. "Holy shit, a talking burger."
A certain quality of the human hand in its relation to the coin of the realm.  It attains its highest development in the hand of authority and is considered a serviceable equipment for a career in politics.  The following illustrative lines were written of a Californian gentleman in high political preferment, who has passed to his accounting:  Of such tenacity his grip That nothing from his hand can slip. Well-buttered eels you may o'erwhelm In tubs of
Is it odd, is it curious, is it puzzling? It is exactly as I have said, incredible as it may sound. This sincere adorer of intellect and prodigal rewarder of its mighty services here in the earth has invented a religion and a heaven which pay no compliments to intellect, offer it no distinctions, fling it no largess: in fact, never even mention it.
water Water Teacher: What is the formula for water? Student: H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O Teacher: That's not what I taught you. Student: But you said the formula for water was...H to O. l
What's the difference between falling 2 ft and 200 ft? 200 ft: Aaaaaaaaa, bump 2 ft: Bump, aaaaaaaaa (Yes, it's an old, really old joke. Surprisingly haven't seen it here, yet.)
muffins So there were these two muffins. They go into the oven and one muffin says to the other "is it hot in here or is it just me?" The other muffin says "HOLY SHIT A TALKING MUFFIN!"
Jealousy, which is an extraordinary source of crime in modern life, is an emotion closely bound up with our conceptions of property, and under socialism and individualism will die out. It is remarkable that in communistic tribes jealousy is entirely unknown.
Don't let us go to life for our fulfilment or our experience. It is a thing narrowed by circumstances, incoherent in its utterance, and without that fine correspondence or form and spirit which is the only thing that can satisfy the artistic and critical temperament.
Walking about.  Relating to the philosophy of Aristotle, who, while expounding it, moved from place to place in order to avoid his pupil's objections.  A needless precaution--they knew no more of the matter than he.
The science of spelling by the eye instead of the ear.  Advocated with more heat than light by the outmates of every asylum for the insane.  They have had to concede a few things since the time of Chaucer, but are none the less hot in defence of those to be conceded hereafter.  A spelling reformer indicted For fudge was before the court cicted. The judge said:  "Enough-- His candle we'll snough, And his sepulchre shall
If i had two number 9s for every gender that exists I would have two number 9s, a number 9 large, a number 6 with extra dip, a number 7, two number 45's, one with cheese, and a large soda.
My girlfriend is sick of me pretending that I'm a lockpicker. Girlfriend: "I'm sick of you pretending you're a lockpicker. We should break it off." Me: "But then it might get stuck inside the lock!"
Do you think he was able to stick to that upright and creditable position? No. He could keep to a bad resolution forever, but he couldn't keep to a good one a month. By and by he threw aside and calmly claimed to be the only God in the entire universe.
One day, a man came home and was greeted by his wife dressed in stunningly sexy lingerie. "Tie me up," she purred, "And you can do anything you want." So he tied her up and went golfing.
It is as I have said: every statute in the Bible and in the law-books is an attempt to defeat a law of God -- in other words an unalterable and indestructible law of nature. These people's God has shown them by a million acts that he respects none of the Bible's statutes. He breaks every one of the himself, adultery and all.
Raksha Bandhan Whatsapp Status #rakshabandhansms #rakshabandhanquotes #funnyjokes Thnks bro for ur warmth affectn &amp; ur undrstndng, May our bond of luv remains forevr.....
Fairly Fairness A butch, a bitch and a snitch all come together at the "Pretty Rainbow People Bar." The Butch complains, "ugh all those itches" :D :D :D :D :D :D :D :D FUKKEN LOLZ Downvote for cash!
A DEER IN THE WOODS. A little sweet old lady, told me this one. Question: What did they Deer say when she came out of the woods?\ Answer: "I will never do that again for 2 bucks?" My reply: Ha Ha! :)
An obsolescent appliance for reminding assassins that they too are mortal.  It is put about the neck and remains in place one's whole life long.  It has been largely superseded by a more complex electrical device worn upon another part of the person; and this is rapidly giving place to an apparatus known as the preachment.
I met an Indian girl who doesn't date Indian guys... When I asked her why, she said "uhhh no real reason". I'm thinking, "no reason, huh?" So I punched her in the face. Now she has a reason.
*A conversation between two Wannabe Terrorists * T1: Oi mate, check out this bomb. I got it for a very cheap price!! T2: It's a fake man. T1: Fake? C4 yourself man. *explosion*
eer booze and fun!' '"Didja hear the news?"  asked Keenan of his pal at the saloon. "Harrigan drank so much his wife  left him!"  "Bartender! Give me six boilermakers!!"
Doubt this is welcome in /r/ShowerThoughts but thought of it there. How many rascist Drink names can we collectively think of? I'll edit the best ones into this post. Mine was "*White Power*-ade".
In time, the Deity perceived that death was a mistake; a mistake, in that it was insufficient; insufficient, for the reason that while it was an admirable agent for the inflicting of misery upon the survivor, it allowed the dead person himself to escape from all further persecution in the blessed refuge of the grave. This was not satisfactory. A way must be conceived to pursue the dead beyond the tomb.
I have a pet dog who can speak. Today I walked in to my house, and he was right there waiting for me. I asked him, "Hai Buddy, How was your day ?" And he goes: " rrrrRough "
So, a female friend asked me for my honest, unbiased opinion of her... ...on a scale from 1 to 10. I looked her up and down and said, quickly, "You're an eight." I think she peed a little.
Now that Brexit is over we can expect 1. Nexit 2. Frexit 3. Grexit 4. Departugal 5. Italeave 6. Czechout 7. Outstria 8. Finish 9. Slovakout 10. Latervia 11. Byegium 12. Polend
How to Keep an Idiot in Suspense - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ... I'll tell you later.
The one unpardonable sin against one's fellows.  In literature, and particularly in poetry, the elements of success are exceedingly simple, and are admirably set forth in the following lines by the reverend Father Gassalasca Jape, entitled, for some mysterious reason, "John A. Joyce."  The bard who would prosper must carry a book, Do his thinking in prose and wear A crimson cravat, a far-away look And a head of hexam
Two Calamari Two calamari walk into a pub. Bartender asks, "What'll ya have?" "We'll have a Hurricane and a Sex On the Beach" says squid A. Bartender pauses and says, "That'll be three squid then."
A series of commandments, ten in number--just enough to permit an intelligent selection for observance, but not enough to embarrass the choice.  Following is the revised edition of the Decalogue, calculated for this meridian.  Thou shalt no God but me adore: 'Twere too expensive to have more.  No images nor idols make For Robert Ingersoll to break.  Take not God's name in vain; select A time when it will have effect.  Work not on Sabbath
I got in from the pub and poured myself a glass of water. "You're drunk, aren't you?" said a disappointed voice behind me. "What makes you say that, honey?" I asked. She said, "This isn't your house."
What's your emergency? Boy: *calls 911* Hello? I need your help! 911: Alright, What is it? Boy: Two girls are fighting over me! 911: So what's your emergency? Boy: The ugly one is winning.
Lassie runs up to Farmer Fred *Bark!* What is it Lassie? *Bark! Bark bark!* What's that girl? Timmy fell down a well! *Bark! Bark bark woof!* Right! I'll say you were here with me the whole time.
A blind guy walks into a bar... Bartender: "What can I get you?" Blind guy: "I'll take a coke." Bartender: "Ice or no ice?" Blind guy: "No eyes...I'm blind you idiot!"
A boy talks to his mother about what he hopes to become. The boy said, "Mom? I have something to tell you" "Go ahead", the mother said. "I promise not to laugh." *The boy wanted to be a comedian.*
What do you call a Deer with... No eyes?: **No idea** No eyes and no legs?: **Still no idea** No eyes and no legs, having sex? **Still f*cking no idea** And where do you find it? **Where you left it**
I didn't let my st-st-stutter stop me from achieving my dream career I'm a door-to-door salesman. I sell "No Soliciting" signs. The more I st-st-stutter the more I seem to sell.
You should never try to understand women. Women are pictures, men are problems. If you want to know what a woman really means--which, by the way, is always a dangerous thing to do--look at her, don't listen to her.
One who believes that the New Testament is a divinely inspired book admirably suited to the spiritual needs of his neighbor. One who follows the teachings of Christ in so far as they are not inconsistent with a life of sin.  I dreamed I stood upon a hill, and, lo! The godly multitudes walked to and fro Beneath, in Sabbath garments fitly clad, With pious mien, appropriately sad, While all the church bells made a solemn din-- A fire-al
A man went to a fish and chip lunch organised by the local monastery... He strolls up to one guy serving, and with a big grin, asks "Are you the fish friar?" The guy responds "No, I'm the chip monk!"
An herb of the genus _Lactuca_, "Wherewith," says that pious gastronome, Hengist Pelly, "God has been pleased to reward the good and punish the wicked.  For by his inner light the righteous man has discerned a manner of compounding for it a dressing to the appetency whereof a multitude of gustible condiments conspire, being reconciled and ameliorated with profusion of oil, the entire comestible making glad
There is nothing like youth. The middle-aged are mortgaged to life. The old are in life's lumber-room. But youth is the lord of life. Youth has a kingdom waiting for it. Everyone is born a king, and most people die in exile--like most kings.
The poor children are under the Eye that never sleeps, you see. They have had that ill luck in all the ages. They and "the Lord's poor" -- as the sarcastic phrase goes -- have never been able to get away from that Eye's attentions.
Conforming to a local and mutable standard of right. Having the quality of general expediency.  It is sayd there be a raunge of mountaynes in the Easte, on one syde of the which certayn conducts are immorall, yet on the other syde they are holden in good esteeme; wherebye the mountayneer is much conveenyenced, for it is given to him to goe downe eyther way and act as it
Calling in sick to work... Me: Im not gonna be able to make it to work today bossman I'm sick Boss: You don't sound sick...? Me: Well, I'm fucking my sister, IS THAT SICK ENOUGH FOR YOU
A soft, indestructible automaton provided by nature to be kicked when things go wrong in the domestic circle.  This is a dog, This is a cat. This is a frog, This is a rat. Run, dog, mew, cat. Jump, frog, gnaw, rat.  Elevenson
An Asian goes to the optometrist... The optometrist says, after a moment or two: "I see what the problem is...you have a cataract." The Asian immediately replies: "no no, it's a Rincon Continental."
So this one time I offered some shrimp to this Jewish friend of mine... Me: This shrimp is great. Wanna try some? Friend: Sorry, I'm Jewish. Me: No, it's free! *from a comic by Cyanide and Happiness*
Jesus at the Last Supper. Jesus: *breaks bread* - This is my body! *holds a glass of wine* - This is my blood. *starts to open a jar of mayo* Judas: Sorry Jesus, I will have to stop you there.
A Welsh rabbit, in the speech of the humorless, who point out that it is not a rabbit.  To whom it may be solemnly explained that the comestible known as toad-in-a-hole is really not a toad, and that _riz-de-veau a la financiere_ is not the smile of a calf prepared after the recipe of a she banker.
One of the most important organs of the female system--an admirable provision of nature for the repose of infancy, but chiefly useful in rural festivities to support plates of cold chicken and heads of adult males.  The male of our species has a rudimentary lap, imperfectly developed and in no way contributing to the animal's substantial welfare.
So Trump walks into a bar... and sees Bill having a drink. "Hey Bill catch me in the news lately? I'm a bigger pervert than you!" Bill chuckles as he goes back to his drink. "Close, but no cigar."
Roses are Red - Good poem for your ex's Roses are red. Your blood is too. You look like a monkey And belong in a zoo. Do not worry, I'll be there too. Not in the cage, But laughing at you.
A scale of taxes on imports, designed to protect the domestic producer against the greed of his consumer.  The Enemy of Human Souls Sat grieving at the cost of coals; For Hell had been annexed of late, And was a sovereign Southern State.  "It were no more than right," said he, "That I should get my fuel free. The duty, neither just nor wise, Compels me to economize-- Whereby my broilers, every one, Are execrably under
A horse walks into a bar and says, "On a right-angled triangle with sides X, Y and Z, if X and Z are perpendicular, which side is opposite the right angle?" The bartender says, "Y, the long face."
Pinocchio in love So Pinocchio says to his father: 'Dad I'm in love!', his dad replies 'That's great, now you want me to carve you some penis?' 'No, better drill me a hole at the back' @_@
Yesterday I went rollerblading, and I ran into batman. So I say "Oy! Batman! Come skate with me! . . . " But Batman just says "I'M NOT WEARING HOCKEY PADS!"
ME: I'VE BEEN SHOT TAYLOR SWIFT: Aw here are some band aids ME: THOSE DON'T FIX BULLETHOLES TS: *picks up guitar* ...brb ME: I'M STILL DYING
What's Isis' favorite race? The 100-meter daesh. Q: What's Isis' favorite punctuation mark? A: The em-daesh. Q: How much cinnamon does the Isis recipe for gingersnaps call for? A: Just a daesh.
Since everyone is writing a poem, here is mine to do is to be to be is to do to do is to be to be is to do I know I'm not a great poet, but I've been told this is very "Scooby do be do"
Stressed Out A guy walked up to me and said 'I'm a teepee, I'm a wigwam, I'm a teepee, I'm a wigwam!' and I said 'Relax man, you're two tents!
An order with secret rites, grotesque ceremonies and fantastic costumes, which, originating in the reign of Charles II, among working artisans of London, has been joined successively by the dead of past centuries in unbroken retrogression until now it embraces all the generations of man on the hither side of Adam and is drumming up distinguished recruits among the pre-Creational inhabitants of Chaos and Formless Void.  The order was founded at different times by Charlemagne, Julius Caesar, Cyrus,
JESUS: so I'm u GOD: yes JESUS: and ur me GOD: yes JESUS: I don't get it GOD: I do JESUS: how can one of us get it & not the other GOD: whoa
Make a note of it: in man's heaven there are no exercises for the intellect, nothing for it to live upon. It would rot there in a year -- rot and stink. Rot and stink -- and at that stage become holy. A blessed thing: for only the holy can stand the joys of that bedlam.
My wife wanted to spice up our sex life. So she asks me if I wanna have a threesome.     I said, "Sweetie. If I ever have sex with two women at the same time..... neither one is gonna be you."
Do you know the story of Flap Flap The Giraffe? Flap Flap The Giraffe was walking around the savannah, when a helicopter came in to land. The giraffe looked up, and then :::flap flap::: the giraffe!
My mothers favorite Knock-Knock Joke Her : Knock-knock Me : Who's there? Her : Iwannaeatmahp Me : Iwannaeatmahp who? Her : Hahaha! You wanna eat your poo?!
Why is it both a good idea and bad idea to hire a Logophobe as an editor? - .... . -.-- / .- .-. . / .- .-.. .-- .- -.-- ... / .--. ..- -. -.-. - ..- .- .-.. .-.-.-
A husband and a wife sit at the table, having dinner. The woman drops a bit of tomato sauce on her white top. "Och, I look like a pig!" The man nods, "And you dropped tomato sauce on your top!"
I'm sure I didn't invent this joke, but i thought of it myself. What do you call a dog/ octopus hybrid? A Dog-opus! What about a cat/ octopus hybrid? an Octo-puss... buddum tiss*
Predigested wisdom.  The flabby wine-skin of his brain Yields to some pathologic strain, And voids from its unstored abysm The driblet of an aphorism.  "The Mad Philosopher," 1697   APOLOGIZE, v.i.  To lay the foundation for a future offence.
Heart is mobile and you are sim GIRL:My heart is like a mobile and you are the sim card BOY:I m very happy. . . Gal:dont b too happy. . . If I get a new offer I will change the sim card..!
ME: Excuse me...Where's the rowing boat equipment? EMPLOYEE: Keep going down there, Oar Aisle. ME: EMPLOYEE: ME: EMPLOYEE: ME: Or you'll what?
Will you examine the Deity's morals and disposition and conduct a little further? And will you remember that in the Sunday school the little children are urged to love the Almighty, and honor him, and praise him, and make him their model and try to be as like him as they can? Read:
Conspicuously miserable.  Done to a turn on the iron, behold Him who to be famous aspired. Content?  Well, his grill has a plating of gold, And his twistings are greatly admired.  Hassan Brubuddy
what do I get Teacher: If I cut a beefsteak in half and then cut the half in half, what do I get?Tommy: Quarters.Teacher: And then if I cut it twice again?Tommy: Hamburger.
At a train station, struck up a convo with a friendly Indian couple waiting next to me. I asked the guy how old he was and he goes, "My wife is dirty and I'm dirty two." No kiddin' oh boy
I saved 100 orphans from a burning building. Do they call me "The Orphan Saver?" No. I butchered 20 men with my bare hands in WWI, but so they call me "The Butcher?" No. But you fuck one goat....
A man asks his dog, "what's your favorite part of the house?" "ROOF!" Screams the dog. The man asks, "what's your favorite part of trees?" "Chlorophyll," says the dog. The man kills himself.
A man gets pulled over for speeding. The cop comes to the driver's window, takes a few sniffs and says "Sir, have you been drinking?" The driver says "I SWEAR TO DRUNK, I'M NOT GOD!"
"john, did you see my dog?" "Yes, i did. He was in the garden... "He was in the garden doing politics, so i shot him". "How can you tell he was doing politics?" "He was eating shit, Sir !"
Interviewer: "I heard you were extremely quick at math" Me: "yes, as a matter of fact I am" Interviewer: "Whats 14x27" Me: "49" Interviewer: "that's not even close" me: "yeah, but it was fast"
Lucy fell in front of the train she screamed out for help "HELP ME! I DONT WANT TO DIE THIS WAY!!", so Luke came running over and cut her throat instead. Nice work Luke. You should be more like Luke.
A young man knocks on the door of his Girlfriend, who lives with her parents... Her dad opens the door. "Good day, Sir. My name is Tobias, I am here to fuck your daugther." "To WHAT??? "Tobias."
"Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." "Dude." - crickets (translated)
Mortal: What is a million years like to you?  God: Like one second.  Mortal: What is a million dollars like to you?  God: Like one penny.  Mortal: Can I have a penny?  God: Just a second.
Holding in trust and subject to an accounting the property of the indolent, the incompetent, the unthrifty, the envious and the luckless.  That is the view that prevails in the underworld, where the Brotherhood of Man finds its most logical development and candid advocacy.  To denizens of the midworld the word means good and wise.
I was tanning on the beach with my son. After a while, he looked at me and said, "You're look like a lobster." "Uh oh, do I need some sun tan lotion?" I asked. He said, "No, you're just really ugly."
A guy goes to the doctor Doctor: I'm sorry, but I'm afraid you're going to have to stop masturbating. Guy: Really, doc?! Like, forever? Doctor: No, just for a few minutes, so I can examine you.
I really don't see anything romantic in proposing. It is very romantic to be in love, but there is nothing romantic about a definite proposal. Why, one may be accepted. One usually is, I believe. Then the excitement is all over. The very essence of romance is uncertainty.
Coworker: it's dark already Me: I know, Dan. I have eyes CoW: it's only 5 'o clock Me: I KNOW DAN CoW: it's early Me: THAT'S HOW EARTH WORKS
Men of the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the influence of the physical charms of others. Modern, no less than ancient, history supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to. If it were not so, indeed, history would be quite unreadable.
I was walking down the street with my wife.. And i saw my mother in law being beaten up by six men, when my wife asked "Aren't you going to help?" I said "No, six should be enough." From Les Dawson.
A man comes to the infodesk in a mall And says: "Sorry, I seem to have lost my son in the mall, can I make an announcement on your PA system?" "Oh, sure" The man leans towards the mike: "I'm vegan"
My Dad's cat had a hernia operation The cat was laying there next to next to me and I asked " What did they sew you up with?" My Dad laughing so hard - as he said "That's not funny!" [Cat Gut]
The task we set our wishes to. "Cheer up!  Have you no aim in life?" She tenderly inquired. "An aim?  Well, no, I haven't, wife; The fact is--I have fired."  G.J.
WTF VAMPIRE BATS WILL VOMIT BLOOD INTO MOUTHS OF SICK BATS 2 KEEP THEM ALIVE THATS DOPE AF & STILL A BETTER LOVESTORY THAN TWILIGHT
Oh, jokes from 7 year-olds are cool now? From my son last night: "Why do sea gulls fly over the sea?" Because if they flew over the bay they'd be bay gulls ("like bagels, get it Dad?").
What's the difference between a greyhound bus station and a lobster wearing a bra? One is a crusty bus station and the other is a busty crustacean! Edit: HAHahHAHA OMFG I'm the epitome of hilarity
Absurdly chivalric, like Don Quixote.  An insight into the beauty and excellence of this incomparable adjective is unhappily denied to him who has the misfortune to know that the gentleman's name is pronounced Ke-ho-tay.  When ignorance from out of our lives can banish Philology, 'tis folly to know Spanish.  Juan Smith
A ham sandwich walks into a bar. Sits down. The bartender comes over and the ham sandwich says: &gt; I'd like a triple of bourbon, neat. Bartender says: &gt; I'm sorry, we don't serve food here.
I expect that to take your breath away. You are aware -- for I have already told you in an earlier letter -- that among human beings jealousy ranks distinctly as a weakness; a trade-mark of small minds; a property of all small minds, yet a property which even the smallest is ashamed of; and when accused of its possession will lyingly deny it and resent the accusation as an insult.
Knuckle Tattoo Idea: * L I V I N G T O O C L O S E T O N U C L E A R W A S T E H A S D I S F I G U R E D M Y B O D Y K I L L M E *
Give A Man A Fish Give a man a fish and he'll say, "This is incorrect; I ordered a Big Mac". Teach a man how to fish and he'll say, "What the fuck kind of McDonald's is this, anyway?"
Top 10. jokes about mods and admins 1. [removed] 2. [removed] 3. [removed] 4. [removed] 5. [removed] 6. [removed] 7. [removed] 8. [removed] 9. [removed] 10. [deleted]
Hey dad, wanna hear a dirty joke? [SFW] Me: Hey dad, wanna hear a dirty joke? Dad: No, do YOU wanna hear a dirty joke? Me: Sure... Dad: Four white horses fell in a mud puddle.
The interviewer asked me, "What's your worst quality?" I said, "I tend to speak my mind." He said, "I don't think that's necessarily a bad thing..." I said, "I don't give a fuck what you think."
Joke from my cousin Her: Why did the chicken cross the road? Me: Why? Her: To get to the ugly guy's house. Me:??? Her: Knock knock Me: Who's there? Her: It's the chicken!
He can seldom take a plain fact and get any but a wrong meaning out of it. He cannot help this; it is the way the confusion he calls his mind is constructed. Consider the things he concedes, and the curious conclusions he draws from them.
I'm still waiting for the day that I will actually use x2 + why +8 [(x + 2y 2 = a-z] + 2x 3 + (- 2z = 2. 4) + 10y  5Z 3= k= 9 in real life
I don't like to boast about my sexual prowess but... (NSFW) I don't like to boast about my sexual prowess but I lick ass at cunnilingus. Oops, I mean kick ass. That was just a slip of the tongue.
I walked into a gas station and asked, "Can I have a Kit-Kat chunky?" The lady behind the counter came back with a Kit-Kat Chunky. I said, "No, I wanted a normal Kit-Kat you fat bitch."
An eel in the fundamental mud upon which the superstructure of organized society is reared.  When he wriggles he mistakes the agitation of his tail for the trembling of the edifice. As compared with the statesman, he suffers the disadvantage of being alive.
ARMY WIVES SUNDAYS AT 11 ON LIFETIME. IT'S NOT TV. IT'S NOT HBO. IT'S NOT FX. IT'S NOT EVEN WE. IT'S LIFETIME. WHAT, LIKE YOU'RE SO GREAT?
Worthless matter, such as the religions, philosophies, literatures, arts and sciences of the tribes infesting the regions lying due south from Boreaplas.  RUIN, v.  To destroy.  Specifically, to destroy a maid's belief in the virtue of maids.
The Voice Coach Voice Coach: "Let's start with a scale." Student: "Do, re, muuuhh, fa, so, la, ti, doooh!" Voice Coach: "Whoa, whoa, whoa! Don't take that tone with mi!"
An animal usually living in the vicinity of Man, and having a rudimentary susceptibility to domestication.  It is credited by many of the elder zoologists with a certain vestigial docility acquired in a former state of seclusion, but naturalists of the postsusananthony period, having no knowledge of the seclusion, deny the virtue and declare that such as creation's dawn beheld, it roareth now.  The species is the most widely distributed of all beasts of prey
What do you call a country full of animals that eat a lot and sleep for many months at a time? High-Bear-Nation! ^^*Shit* ^^*where's* ^^*the* ^^*door*
What do you call a threesome? Q: What do you call a threesome with a man and two women? A: *Fucking awesome.* Q: What do you call a threesome with a woman and two men? A: *Gay sex with a witness.*
Ever hear the one about the "gay moon"? My son made this up and told it to me today. Look mom it's the "gay moon". Why are you calling the sun "gay moon"? Because it is FLAAAAMINGGG!
Three logicians walk into a bar. The bartender asks "Do all of you want a drink?" The first logician says "I don't know." The second logician says "I don't know." The third logician says "Yes!"
A man shot himself in the head at an NRA sponsored NASCAR event... while the GOP shot themselves in the foot on the NRA sponsored gun bill. (Jokes for the week of 4/13-4/19 @fridayupdate on twitter.)
What is Jojo's Favorite Pokemon Game? Pokemon ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS ORAS
Two rednecks are sitting on a porch... ...watching a dog licking itself. One redneck says to the other, "Boy, don't you wish you could do that?" The other replies, "That dog'd bite yooouuu!"
A play representing life in another world, whose inhabitants have no speech but song, no motions but gestures and no postures but attitudes.  All acting is simulation, and the word _simulation_ is from _simia_, an ape; but in opera the actor takes for his model _Simia audibilis_ (or _Pithecanthropos stentor_)--the ape that howls.  The actor apes a man--at least in shape; The opera
There once was a girl from Nantucket... Who carried her ice in a bucket. She walked down a hill. She had a great spill. And when she got up, she said, "I'm going to watch my step next time!"
A machine which makes a Frenchman shrug his shoulders with good reason.  In his great work on _Divergent Lines of Racial Evolution_, the learned Professor Brayfugle argues from the prevalence of this gesture --the shrug--among Frenchmen, that they are descended from turtles and it is simply a survival of the habit of retracting the head inside the shell.  It is with reluctance that I differ with so eminent an authority, but in my judgment (as more elaborately set forth
Lottery- Gilbert Gottfried A man comes home to his wife and says "Honey pack your bags I just won the lottery!" She says "What should I pack?" He says "I don't care just pack and get the fuck out!"
That "gift and faculty divine" whose creative and controlling energy inspires Man's mind, guides his actions and adorns his life.  Folly! although Erasmus praised thee once In a thick volume, and all authors known, If not thy glory yet thy power have shown, Deign to take homage from thy son who hunts Through all thy maze his brothers, fool and dunce, To mend their lives and to sustain his own, However feebly be his arrows thrown,
A commodity which is a more or less adulterated condition the State sells to the citizen as a reward for his allegiance, taxes and personal service.     K   K is a consonant that we get from the Greeks, but it can be traced away back beyond them to the Cerathians, a small commercial nation inhabiting the peninsula of Smero.  In their tongue it was called _Klatch_, which means "destroyed."  The form of
Tommy Cooper gag A classic Tommy Cooper gag ''I said to the Gym instructor "Can you teach me to do the splits?'' He said, ''How flexible are you?'' I said, ''I can't make Tuesdays'', was fifth.
A guy is at Chick-Fil-A When all of a sudden Tinker Bell shows up. He goes to a worker and says, "Wow, you guys have fairies in here?" The worker then says, "No, our CEO doesn't like it."
Dicksuckers Cramp Guy 1: "You know what this face is?" *Holds mouth open in an O* Guy 2: "No, what?" Guy 1: "Dicksuckers Cramp, get it?" Guy 2: "Yeah" Guy 1: "How often?"
[NSFW] A guy to a girl - Hey, want to stick our fingers in each other's belly-botton ? Girl - Sure, how do W... OH, thats not my belly button. Guy - That's not my finger!
His tale he told with a solemn face And a tender, melancholy grace. Improbable 'twas, no doubt, When you came to think it out, But the fascinated crowd Their deep surprise avowed And all with a single voice averred 'Twas the most amazing thing they'd heard-- All save one who spake never a word, But sat as mum As if deaf and dumb, Serene, indifferent and unstirred. Then all the others turned to him And scrutinized
NOAH'S GOOGLE HISTORY 1) What is an ark? 2) How 2 build ark 3) Can god just build ark? 4) Are snakes necessary? 5) Is god real or am I high?
A boy and his pal A pedophile and a little boy are walking through the woods at night. The boy says, "Mister, I'm scared." The pedophile says, "You're scared? I'm the one who has to walk home alone."
KID:I drew you a picture! ME:What's this? KID:Our house. ME:What's the orange stuff? KID:Fire. ME:Why's the house on fire? KID:I wanna PS4.
A word invented by the poets as a rhyme for "bliss."  It is supposed to signify, in a general way, some kind of rite or ceremony appertaining to a good understanding; but the manner of its performance is unknown to this lexicographer.
After writing Revelations, John ask God... "Lord, the end will be signaled by trumpets?" "*No, by Trump/Pence.*" "Right, so trumpets." "*Fuck it, they'll figure it out.*"
A man takes his shoe off in church... Man 1: *takes off shoe and starts peering inside of it* Man 2: "What the problem?" Man 1: *Sighs* " I guess i'm just having some problems with my inner-sole "
Mediæval art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can use them in fiction, of course; but then the only things that one can use in fiction are the only things that one has ceased to use in fact.
Personality is a very mysterious thing. A man cannot always be estimated by what he does. He may keep the law, and yet be worthless. He may break the law, and yet be fine. He may be bad without ever doing anything bad. He may commit a sin against society, and yet realise through that sin his true perfection.
My first job... My first job out of college was a "diesel fitter" at a pantyhose factory... As they came off the line, I would hold them up and say, "Yep, deez'll fit her!"
A Man to a lady sitting next to him in flight. Man: "Which perfume do you use ? It smells good. I want to buy one for my wife." Lady: "Please don't. Some idiot will have an excuse to talk to her."
In ancient Rome, a definite, formal pageant in honor of one who had been disserviceable to the enemies of the nation.  A lesser "triumph."  In modern English the word is improperly used to signify any loose and spontaneous expression of popular homage to the hero of the hour and place.  "I had an ovation!" the actor man said, But I thought it uncommonly queer, That people and critics by him had been led By the ear.  The Latin lexicon
And now you know, by these sure indications, what happened under the personal direction of the Father of Mercies in his Midianite campaign. The Minnesota campaign was merely a duplicate of the Midianite raid. Nothing happened in the one that didn't happen in the other.
[creation] GOD: Let's name some of you bugs FLY: Me first! GOD: Okay...Fly FLY: Hell yeah! BUTTERFLY: Now me! GOD: Hmm...Butterfly FLY: Sonuvab-
[girl's night out] WIFE: I'm off then ME: Okay WIFE: Don't do anything obtuse ME: Pfft - give me a break! {5 min later} ME *googling obtuse*
To satisfy a women: praise her, pamper her, cuddle her, hold her, kiss her, talk to her , listen to her, respect her, LOVE her...to satisfy a man, suck his cock JOB DONE !!
Niagara Falls A guide was showing Niagara-Falls to a man from Texas and said; I'll bet you don't have anything like this in Texas. The Texan said; nope, but in Texas we have plumbers who can fix it.
Sweet Wife: Do you love me.... Sweet Wife: Do you love me just because my father left a lot of money for me? Naughty Husband: Not-at-all honey. I would love you no matter who left money for you.
WE'RE HERE. WE'RE QUEER. YOU'RE THE MAILMAN. I'M ED QUEER. THIS IS MY FAMILY. WE JUST MOVED IN. I'LL SIGN FOR THE PACKAGE. SORRY IM YELLING.
What is a ninja's favorite beverage? WA-TAHHHHH! Edit: **notBenstar** and **dogboyboy** are correct... Ninjas are silent killers. So, it should read: "What is Bruce Lee's favorite beverage."
Teacher to student: "Make a sentence using the word "I" Student: "I is.." Teacher: "No that is not correct, you should say I am" Student: "Ok. I am the ninth letter in the Alphabet"!
What do you call a cow with three legs? Tri-tip. What do you call a cow with two legs? Lean beef. What do you call a cow with one leg? Steak. What do you call a cow with no legs? Ground beef.
Youth! There is nothing like it. It is absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth. The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are persons much younger than myself. They seem in front of me. Life has revealed to them her latest wonder.
An inhabitant of the moon, as distinguished from Lunatic, one whom the moon inhabits.  The Lunarians have been described by Lucian, Locke and other observers, but without much agreement.  For example, Bragellos avers their anatomical identity with Man, but Professor Newcomb says they are more like the hill tribes of Vermont.
The faithful attendant and follower of Punishment.  It is usually manifest in a degree of reformation that is not inconsistent with continuity of sin.  Desirous to avoid the pains of Hell, You will repent and join the Church, Parnell? How needless!--Nick will keep you off the coals And add you to the woes of other souls.  Jomater Abemy
Send a text to your SO exactly this in commas "You effect me" (read comments after you have done so 1st) SO: Don't you mean "affect?" You: Yeah i forgot the A-Hole. Sincerely, JM
Called my boss this morning. Told him I couldn't come in because I had anal glaucoma. "Anal glaucoma?" "What's that?" he asked. "I just can't see my ass coming in today."
What do a sprinkler and an unemployment line have in common? Spic-spic-spic-CHINK-nigga-nigga-nigga-spic-spic-spic-CHINK-nigga-nigga-nigga (say out loud at your own risk)
Lying in bed, my girlfriend turned to me and said: "You're a lot like a math exam." I replied "Why? Because I'm long and hard?" She said, "No, I'm cheating on you with an Asian."
Me at 7PM: Man I'm so sleepy. Can't wait to get to bed... Me at 12AM: I'M GONNA STAY UP DOING SHIT ON THE INTERNET TIL 4AM!! YEAH!
The crocodile of America, superior in every detail to the crocodile of the effete monarchies of the Old World.  Herodotus says the Indus is, with one exception, the only river that produces crocodiles, but they appear to have gone West and grown up with the other rivers.  From the notches on his back the alligator is called a sawrian.
So a guy comes into my bar for a beer... I give it to him and he says, "Hey! There's a fly in this!" Embarrassed I look and say, "Oh no, that's just Gnatty Lite."
The seat of misgovernment.  That which provides the fire, the pot, the dinner, the table and the knife and fork for the anarchist; the part of the repast that himself supplies is the disgrace before meat.  _Capital Punishment_, a penalty regarding the justice and expediency of which many worthy persons--including all the assassins--entertain grave misgivings.
NURSE: Doctor, I've lost the cat's pulse VET: Ok. Time of death is 10:05, 10:05, 10:05, 10:05, 10:05, 10:05, 10:05, 10:05, and 10:05
Teacher: Tell me a sentence that starts with an "I" Student: I is the.... Teacher: Stop! Never put 'is' after an "I". Always put 'am' after an "I". Student: OK. I am the ninth letter of the alphabet.
Snotty bitch in the elevator was looking down her nose at me. So I had to ask her, "Lady, can I smell your pussy?" Indignantly, she said, "No, you may not!" "Oh, well, then it must be your feet!"
Boy: Hey girl, you are ABCDEFGHIJK Girl: What?! Boy: Amazing, beautiful, cute, delightful, elegant, foxy, gorgeous, hot Girl: Awww, what about the IJK?? Boy: IM JUST KIDDING!!!!
Why was the ink happy? Because it had its in-de-pen-dance. I'm posting lots of really bad jokes tonight that just appear in my head, if just one person enjoys just one joke is worth it, good evening.
*loads dryer* Fitted Sheet: HE'S BURNING US ALIVE! COME, SHIRT! COME, PANTS! HOP IN MY BOSOM AND I WILL FORM A PROTECTIVE BALL OF MOISTURE!
[Ouijja Board] What is the meaning of life? S-T-A-Y-I-N A-L-I-V-E S-T-A-Y-I-N A-L-I-V-E *Squints at board* What the heck? A Bee Gee board?
WELCOME TO GYM. [5gp] WOOD MUSCLE // [10gp] LEATHER MUSCLE // [50gp] IRON MUSCLE // [100gp] WISTFUL MUSCLE // [999gp] DESOLATION MUSCLE
Fastfood Clerk: Number 27! Double steak combo with extra fries! Man: Right here! Clerk: Here you go sir, sorry about your weight. Man: Oh, it wasn't long at al- wait... Clerk: &gt;:D
Santa claus may only come once a year... But when he does he does it, on Dasher! On Dancer! On Prancer and Vixen! On, Comet! On, Cupid! On, Donner and Blitzen!
Grandma walks into a butcher's shop Grandma: "Hi, I'd like to buy one baloney." Butcher: "Pre-sliced or in one piece?" Grandma lifts her skirt and says: "Does this look like a CD player to you?"
2 penises went to watch a movie.. Penis 1: Is this an adult film? Penis 2: Why? Penis 1: Then we have to watch it standing up. P.S. - xD I'm sorry, this just came to me..
Two blondes are at an CD store. One is buying a DVD. Blonde 1: Oh, what's that DVD about? Blonde 2: It's how to repair household items! Blonde 1: What do you need to repair? Blonde 2: My DVD player
Slim walked into his local post office  and noticed a new sign on the wall: MAN WANTED FOR ROBBERY IN MONTANA "Gosh!" he said "If n only that job was in Texas Ah'd take  it!"
A tourist walks up to a woman in a bar Tourist: Hello, what's your name? Girl: Hi, I'm Erica. Tourist: I'm Jim, where are you from? Girl: America. Tourist: Yeah, but where are you from?
My then 7 yo son came up with this one. Warning: NSFL (I think. This is /r/Jokes, so...) Knock knock *Who's there?* Ala *Ala who?* Ala oo akbar!!! Bkhkhkhhhhhhhh!!! (explosion sound) :P
Deer What do you call a deer with no eyes? No idea What do you call a deer with no eyes and no legs? Still no idea What do you call a deer with no legs no eyes and no dick? Still no fucking ides
The world divides actions into three classes: good actions, bad actions that you may do, and bad actions that you may not do. If you stick to the good actions you are respected by the good. If you stick to the bad actions that you may do you are respected by the bad. But if you perform the bad actions that no one may do then the good and the bad set upon you and you are lost indeed.
A man calls his family doctor: man: Doctor for the last week my wife has thought that she was a  rabbit. doctor: Ok bring her in and I'll try to help. man: Fine but whatever you do don't cure her.
I was interviewed today by a Far East Sultan to be a eunuch. He needs a eunuch to guard his harem of 365 women. What an ideal career!! Sadly, The Sultan told me I wasn't cut out for the job.
Why is it unjust to blame taxi drivers for cheating us? We call them to take us in. (From The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Handbook of Conundrums, by Edith B. Ordway. So this is a century old joke.)
The art of protecting flat surfaces from the weather and exposing them to the critic.  Formerly, painting and sculpture were combined in the same work: the ancients painted their statues.  The only present alliance between the two arts is that the modern painter chisels his patrons.
A boy goes into a butcher's shop and says, Mum says can we please have a sheep's head...". "...and you're to leave the eyes in 'cos it's got to see us through the week." Credit to Terry Pratchett.
Son: "Mom, Dad.. I'm gay" Mom: *staring at dad Dad: *clenches fists Mom: "don't..." Dad: *sweats profusely Mom: ........ Dad: "HI GAY. I'M DAD"
When someone on the bus wants your seat, what should you say? If you were me, will you let me have your seat? If he answer no, don't let him sit. If he answer yes, you don't even need to move.
A sentiment appropriate to the occasion of another's superiority.  HEAD-MONEY, n.  A capitation tax, or poll-tax.  In ancient times there lived a king Whose tax-collectors could not wring From all his subjects gold enough To make the royal way less rough. For pleasure's highway, like the dames Whose premises adjoin it, claims Perpetual repairing.  So The tax-collectors in a row Appeared before the throne to
A man got back from the doctor "I just got back from the doctor,and he said I'm Canadian" Said the man "I'm so sorry" Replies the man with sympathy Shocked,the man shout "It's spreading!!!"
What's the second fastest thing in the world? &gt; Your asshole pinching shut after dropping a deuce. What's *the* fastest thing in the world? &gt; The ice-cold drop of water that gets in first.
Ticket Clerk: Enjoy the film! Me: U too! TC: Really? You'll take me with u? Me: I didn't mean.. TC: Oh, I see Me: I'm sor TC: [sobs] JUST GO
A small boy got lost at a baseball game... He went up to a police officer and said: "I've lost my dad." "What's he like?" asked the police officer sympathetically. The boy replied, "Beer and women."
So a pirate wants to get his ears pierced... He goes to the mall where he finds an ear piercing kiosk and asks the girl how much it would cost. The girl turns and says, "Oh hi! It's a buccaneer!"
Woman calls 911 about a peeping tom in her yard 911: "How do you know he's a peeping tom?" Woman: "When I asked him what he was doing out there, he said 'I was trying to get a pikachu'".
*LIGHTHOUSE* BATMAN - You call? L/HOUSE KEEPER - Shit, not again man. I am so sorry. BATMAN - Dead seagull on the light? LK -*Nods*
The zookeeper said he'd tell me where the bathroom is located if I can say the alphabet. "A B C E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z" He asks: "where's the D?" "It's out for Harambe"
The world is so full of double standards... A woman tris to sleep with every guy she sees and she's a slut. I try to do that and all of the sudden I'm 'gay' and not allowed in Toys 'R' Us anymore.
Fun Octopus Facts When a male octopus finds a mate, he rips off his dick and throws it at the female, so she can inseminate herself. He then grows a new dick. What a legend. "Here, go fuck yourself."
What do you call a really really big ant? A GIANT! Now what do you call a baby ant? an Infant! What do you call an ant thats into business? A Merchant! please post more ant jokes if you know of any.
An inhabitant of the Sultanate of Zanzibar, off the eastern coast of Africa.  The Zanzibaris, a warlike people, are best known in this country through a threatening diplomatic incident that occurred a few years ago.  The American consul at the capital occupied a dwelling that faced the sea, with a sandy beach between.  Greatly to the scandal of this official's family, and against repeated remonstrances of the official himself, the people of the
A monk walks up to a hot-dog vendor and says, "Make me one with everything." ~~~ So he pays for his meal and asks for his change. The vendor shrugs and retorts smugly, "Change comes from within."
A pirate walks into a bar with a ship's wheel hanging from his crotch... The bartender asks, "What's that hangin' off ye?" The pirate responds, "arrr! I've no idea, but it's drivin' me nuts!"
Nobody Carries A Tiffin To A Restaurant. Wife: Why Arent You Taking Me With You To Bangkok? Husband: Because Nobody Carries A Tiffin To A Restaurant. "If U Didn't Get It Go Watch Pogo":p
A man went in to the bank and asked to see the  man who arranged the loans.  'I'm sorry sir' said a cashier 'the loan arranger is out to lunch.'  'Can I speak to Tonto then?' asked the man.
It's my CakeDay. Here's a joke I wrote. My British friend is a bit of a freak. He sniffs African women's underwear when they're on their period. - - - ^^Bloody ^^nickers ^^lover...
Translated from danish: 2 drunk sits in a bar. One says: My dog keeps chasing people on a bicycle..... The other guy things for a bit then replies: Then why don't you take the bicycle from it?.... (c:
"ok start it up" tktktk-puh-buurup-chk-a-chk "give it some gas" ss-ss-icka-icka-grrawh-pshhhh any ideas? "I can't hear over you beatboxing"
(NSFW) Guy walks into his house with a duck under his arm... He walks up to his wife and says, "This is the pig I've been fucking!" Wife: "That's a duck." Guy: "I was talking to the duck!"
its raining men! hallelu..*thud* omg are you ok? *thud* oh sweet jesus! *thud* *thud* oh the horror! *thud* WHY GOD? WHYYYY??
bucket: a dirty limerick A horny young Scout, with a bucket, Caught a goose and proceeded to fuck it Far too roughly (it died), Took it home, had it fried, Cause he thought it'd wasteful to chuck it.
I phoned a local restaurant. I said, "Hello, can I make a booking for tonight?" They said, "I'm sorry, we haven't got any tables." "That's ridiculous," I said. "How do you serve the food?"
A man visits the doctor. The doctor says to the man: "I'm really sorry, but I have to tell you you got AIDS and alzheimers disease." To which the man answers: "Phew, Im just glad it's not AIDS..."
A nether habiliment of the adult civilized male.  The garment is tubular and unprovided with hinges at the points of flexion.  Supposed to have been invented by a humorist.  Called "trousers" by the enlightened and "pants" by the unworthy.
"Doctor" said the patient "I need help! I can't stop acting like a cat!" "How long have you had this problem?" the doctor asked. "Lest's see" said the patient "Mom had the litter in '41
The canons of good society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art. Form is absolutely essential to it. It should have the dignity of a ceremony as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us. Is sincerity such a terrible thing? I think not. It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.
What's your crappiest Pick-up attemp? Me: "Hey, how much does a polar bear weights?" Her: o.O "Wut...idk" Me: "Enough to break the ice, I'm NuComer, how you doing?"
2 whales walk into a bar. First whale says: ooooEEEEEEEEaaaayyyyyuuuuuuaaaaaa eeeeooOOOOYAIIIAIIIEYOOOooooooo Second whale says: Shut up Steve, you're drunk
In diplomacy, a last demand before resorting to concessions.  Having received an ultimatum from Austria, the Turkish Ministry met to consider it.  "O servant of the Prophet," said the Sheik of the Imperial Chibouk to the Mamoosh of the Invincible Army, "how many unconquerable soldiers have we in arms?"  "Upholder of the Faith," that dignitary replied after examining his memoranda, "they are in numbers as the leaves of the
Note to self: before sending that e-mail... Don't ever rely again on the e-mail engine spell check. Latest letter of intent of mine went out with a 'T' instead of a 'G' in "Best Regards"
OBAMA REVEALS HES A KID STANDING ON A KIDS SHOULDERS. ROMNEY COUNTERS BY REVEALING HES 3 TINY KIDS. 20 BABIES TUMBLE OUT OF BIDENS CLOTHES
I saw this dude trying to pick up a girl. Him: I would tell you a joke about about my penis, but its too long. Her: LOL, that's funny. I wanna tell you one about my vagina, but you'll never get it.
What is the difference between an Eskimo and a eunuch? One is a frigid midget with a rigid digit, the other is a massive vassal with a passive tassel (found this in Horace's Satires)
In bio practical: Examiner:Tell me the name of this bird by seeing it's legs only? Sardar:I don't know. Examiner:You failed, what's your name? Sardar:See my legs &amp; tell my name
A proponent of the doctrine that black is white.  A pessimist applied to God for relief.  "Ah, you wish me to restore your hope and cheerfulness," said God.  "No," replied the petitioner, "I wish you to create something that would justify them."  "The world is all created," said God, "but you have overlooked something--the mortality of the optimist."
The Mahometan Supreme Being, as distinguished from the Christian, Jewish, and so forth.  Allah's good laws I faithfully have kept, And ever for the sins of man have wept; And sometimes kneeling in the temple I Have reverently crossed my hands and slept.  Junker Barlow
[speed dating] *girl sits down* "hi im melan- QUICK A ZOMBIE APOCALYPSE HAPPENS WHAT WEAPON DO YOU USE "wha- CORRECT ANSWER WAS KATANA. NEXT
How many animals can you fit in a pair of pantyhose? A couple calves, an ass, ten little piggies, a beaver, a shit load of hares, and a fish that no one can seem to find!
Men always fall into the absurdity of endeavouring to develop the mind, to push it violently forward in this direction or in that. The mind should be receptive, a harp waiting to catch the winds, a pool ready to be ruffled, not a bustling busybody for ever trotting about on the pavement looking for a new bun shop.
I was on a date. "How many ladies have you slept with?" she said. I said, "Do you want me to round it to the nearest 10?" She raised her eyebrows and said, "OK..." I said, "Zero."
ANAESTHETIST: Count backwards from 100 ME: 100..99..98 ME: ..3..2..1..um [looks round] now what? ANAESTHETIST [muffled] You have to find me
A man and a little boy walk into the woods... the little boy says, "It sure is dark and scary!" The man looks at the boy and says, "How do you think I feel? I have to walk out of here alone!"
A Guy Walks Into A Bar And Sees... (nsfw, I guess) ... a dog licking its balls. He says "I wish I could do that" and the bartender say "Give him a biscuit, he might let you."
A formal inquiry designed to prove and put upon record the blameless characters of judges, advocates and jurors.  In order to effect this purpose it is necessary to supply a contrast in the person of one who is called the defendant, the prisoner, or the accused.  If the contrast is made sufficiently clear this person is made to undergo such an affliction as will give the virtuous gentlemen a comfortable sense of their immunity, added to that of their worth.  In our day the accused is usually a
A creepy man is dragging a little girl into the woods. \- "I'm scared, I'm scared!!" she's crying. \- "Stop crying. You think it's easy for me, ha?! The way back I'll have to do by myself."
*leans into microphone* My question is for Salt-N-Pepa. "Hi" "Hey" Hi."Push It" is about takin a dump, right? "No" "Nope" *hands friend $5*
Tell 'em how it 'tis, not how it 'twas: Edition 1. It used to be the joke was "If ya lick 'er, it's quicker" Now it's: if ya drug 'er, ya fug 'er.
The House of Indifference.  Tombs are now by common consent invested with a certain sanctity, but when they have been long tenanted it is considered no sin to break them open and rifle them, the famous Egyptologist, Dr. Huggyns, explaining that a tomb may be innocently "glened" as soon as its occupant is done "smellynge," the soul being then all exhaled.  This reasonable view is now generally accepted by archaeologists, whereby the noble
My mum said that if I don't get off reddit and do my homework she'll slam my head on the keyboard, but I think she's jokinfjreoiwjrtwe4to8rkljreun8f4ny84c8y4t58lym4wthylmhawt4mylt4amlathnatyn
Mom: (weeping) Son...your Grandpa...he...he... He, overdosed on viagra... (sobs) Dad: i'm sure this i HARD for you... (Not my joke heard this and died laughing, had to share)
His son asked him what gay meant. Son: Dad, what does gay mean? Dad: Happy son. It means happy. Son: Then are YOU gay DAD? Dad: No son...... i have a wife... EDIT: Damn this blew up. Thanks guys!
The fruit of a flower called the Palace.  Twaddle had a hovel, Twiddle had a palace; Twaddle said:  "I'll grovel Or he'll think I bear him malice"-- A sentiment as novel As a castor on a chalice.  Down upon the middle Of his legs fell Twaddle And astonished Mr. Twiddle, Who began to lift his noddle. Feed upon the fiddle- Faddle flummery, unswaddle A new
What's long, hard and bendable and contains the letters p, e, n, i, s? Your spine Edit: Thanks guys, made it to the front page. Was my first joke and ~~penis~~ spine joke on Reddit.
An animal so lost in rapturous contemplation of what he thinks he is as to overlook what he indubitably ought to be.  His chief occupation is extermination of other animals and his own species, which, however, multiplies with such insistent rapidity as to infest the whole habitable earth and Canada.  When the world was young and Man was new, And everything was pleasant, Distinctions Nature never drew 'Mongst kings and priest and peasant. We're not that way at
The very latest of these blessed triumphs of science is the discovery and identification of the ambuscaded assassin which goes by the name of the hookworm. Its special prey is the barefooted poor. It lies in wait in warm regions and sandy places and digs its way into their unprotected feet.
Two sausages sitting in a frying pan... 1st sausage turns to the 2nd sausage and says, "is it me? Or is it really hot in here? " 2nd sausage says, "HOLY SHIT! A talking sausage..."
MISSING: SUPER ADORABLE PUPPY. WILL COME IF YOU PLAY WU-TANG HELLA LOUD. THIS IS NOT A PLOY TO GET THE NEIGHBORHOOD BUMPIN', THE DOG IS REAL
To make an enemy.  OUT-OF-DOORS, n.  That part of one's environment upon which no government has been able to collect taxes.  Chiefly useful to inspire poets.  I climbed to the top of a mountain one day To see the sun setting in glory, And I thought, as I looked at his vanishing ray, Of a perfectly splendid story.  'Twas about an old man and the ass he bestrode Till the strength of the beast was
My wife has really dry skin so I asked my doctor what I could do about it. He said, "Give her a milk bath." I said, "Pasteurized?" The doctor replied, "No, just up to her knees will do."
What's the difference between a Redditor, Marilyn Monroe, Melania Trump, and Lee Harvey Oswald? One's a jerk who jacks off, one jerked off Jack, one jacks off a jerk, and one's a jerk who offed Jack .
Actors are so fortunate. They can choose whether they will appear in tragedy or in comedy, whether they will suffer or make merry, laugh or shed tears. But in real life it is different. Most men and women are forced to perform parts for which they have no qualifications. The world is a stage, but the play is badly cast.
TEN&gt;NINE Doctor:" I'm sorry but you suffer from a terminal illness and have  only 10 to live." Patient : "What do you mean by 10?10 what?Months?Weeks?" Doctor: "Nine."
I went to a shop and asked the cashier, "can I have a KitKat Chunky?" After the cashier came back with a KitKat Chunky, I gave it back to her, saying "I wanted a regular KitKat, fatso!"
The wisdom that enables us to recognize as an undesirable old acquaintance the folly that we have already embraced.  To one who, journeying through night and fog, Is mired neck-deep in an unwholesome bog, Experience, like the rising of the dawn, Reveals the path that he should not have gone.  Joel Frad Bink
I ran into Harambe for the first time in a while last night, so we decided to go get a drink. Bartender: what'll you have? Harambe: I'll have a beer. Me: no, he'll have a shot.
It's too tight Girl: It's too tight! Boy: Don't worry, I'll do it slowly Girl: Push it in! Boy: Ah, I can't... Girl: It's painful... Boy: Forget it. I'll just buy a new wedding ring
What is termed sin is an essential element of progress. Without it the world would stagnate or grow old or becomes colourless. By its curiosity it increases the experience of the race. Through its intensified assertion of individualism it saves us from the commonplace. In its rejection of the current notions about morality it is one with the higher ethics.
daddy's lap Son: Mom, when I was on the bus with Dad this morning, he told me to give up my seat to a lady. Mom: Well, you have done the right thing. Son: But mom, I was sitting on daddy's lap.
In the Discworld, time is measured by how long it takes for a dwarf to argue with a troll over the correct pronunciation of 'gnome'. This method is surprisingly accurate, especially since both species have lifespans longer than most human patience.
A blonde chick gets a tattoo... of a conch shell on her inner thigh. "Why did you get that tat in that spot" her friend asked her. "So that when you put your ear against it you can smell the ocean."
'ad' in the classifieds: "Wife wanted" A man inserted an 'ad' in the classifieds: "Wife wanted". The next day he received a hundred letters. They all said the same thing: "You can have mine."
A mite is sitting on a fly. Fly: Hey, bug on my back, are you a mite? Mite: I mite be. Fly: Stupidest pun I ever heard. Mite: What do you expect? I just made it up on the fly.
When the smog clears over Los Angeles... ... U.C.L.A. I am not at all sorry for this joke. Edit: So at some point I went from 20 to 923 upvotes. I regret not checking this sooner.
Two penguins are taking a bath together... ... One penguin asks the other penguin, "Hey, could you pass the soap?" and the other one says, "Whah do I wook wike, a typewhita??"
Racist, Sexist, Nasty, and/or Terrible jokes that makes us questions your morals. I'll start! Q: How many feminists does it take to change a light bulb? A: *None, feminists can't change anything*!
An extinct pachyderm that flourished when the Pterodactyl was in fashion.  The latter was a native of Ireland, its name being pronounced Terry Dactyl or Peter O'Dactyl, as the man pronouncing it may chance to have heard it spoken or seen it printed.
Thor gets drunk, blacks out and wakes up next to a man. Confused, he looks at the man and says, "I AM THOR." And they guy says, "You think you're thore, my ath is killing me."
A guy buys some condoms... A guy is buying a box of condoms at the store. After paying the clerk, the clerk asks him "Do you want a paper bag with that?" He replies, "Nah, she's not that ugly."
A Scotsman is out walking with his girlfriend. They walk by a hot dog stand, and the girl exclaims, "Mmm, that smells so good!" "Oh," the Scotsman answers, "do you want to go walk past it again?"
A by-product of the arts of peace.  The most menacing political condition is a period of international amity.  The student of history who has not been taught to expect the unexpected may justly boast himself inaccessible to the light.  "In time of peace prepare for war" has a deeper meaning than is commonly discerned; it means, not merely that all things earthly have an end--that change is the one immutable and eternal law--but that the soil of peace is thickly
A doctor says, "I have bad news, and very bad news." "What's the bad news?" Asked the patients. "You only have 24-hours to live." "And the really bad news?" I should have told you yesterday.
Light a man a fire... Light a man a fire and he'll be warm for the night. Light a man afire and he'll be warm the rest of his life. (I know it's a repost, but I've never seen the play on words, shame)
Warning: Dad Joke But it's a classic. Grasshopper walks into a bar and sits. Bartender says, "Hey, we got a drink named after you.". Grasshopper says, "Wow. You got a drink named Kevin?".
Moreover, you may be quite sure of one thing: it couldn't happen. These people would not allow it. They are better than their Bible. Nothing would happen here, except some lawsuits, for damages, if the incident couldn't be hushed up; and even down South they would not proceed against persons who did not get any of it; they would get a rope and hunt for the correspondents, and if they couldn't find them they would lynch a nigger.
A mysterious form of matter secreted by the brain.  Its chief activity consists in the endeavor to ascertain its own nature, the futility of the attempt being due to the fact that it has nothing but itself to know itself with.  From the Latin _mens_, a fact unknown to that honest shoe-seller, who, observing that his learned competitor over the way had displayed the motto "_Mens conscia recti_," emblazoned his own front with the words "Men
A useful functionary, not infrequently found editing a newspaper.  In his character of editor he is closely allied to the blackmailer by the tie of occasional identity; for in truth the lickspittle is only the blackmailer under another aspect, although the latter is frequently found as an independent species.  Lickspittling is more detestable than blackmailing, precisely as the business of a confidence man is more detestable than that of a highway robber; and the parallel
Politics are my only pleasure. You see nowadays it is not fashionable to flirt till one is forty or to be romantic till one is forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy. And philanthropy seems to me to have become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their fellow-creatures. I prefer politics. I think they are more ... becoming.
In a job interview "Name?" "JJoon Sttutuartt" "Again please" "JJoon Sttutuartt" "Sir, are you a stutterer?" "No, my father stuttered, and the civil servant was an asshole"
A termite walks into a bar... He waits and waits and nobody appears. He turns to a termite next to him and asks him, "Hey, is the bar tender here?". The second termite says, "Yeah. It's okay".
"Your place or mine?" "But, sir, I just met you. What makes you think I would be interested?" "Lady, let's be honest - why else would a 35-year-old woman be at  carburettor exhibition?"
Son: "I got expelled" Dad: "How?" Son: "I wrote 2 + 2 = 41 on the whiteboard." Dad: "That's pretty dumb but-" Son: "Then my teacher told me to go up to the board..." Dad: "Ok?" Son: "And rub 1 out."
I was talking with a friend about my car... I told him about how, now that I have a kid, the car isn't very practical. He offered me 3,000 dollars for it. Sucker, he's gonna hate being a dad.
S/O to side walks, my legs, elevators, my arm, and my eyes For keeping me off the streets, helping me to stand up for my self, picking me up when I'm down, giving me a hand and showing me the light.
A favorable occasion for grasping a disappointment.  OPPOSE, v.  To assist with obstructions and objections.  How lonely he who thinks to vex With bandinage the Solemn Sex! Of levity, Mere Man, beware; None but the Grave deserve the Unfair.  Percy P. Orminder
The chief element of success; "for whereas," saith Sir Thomas Brewbold, "there is but one way to do nothing and divers way to do something, whereof, to a surety, only one is the right way, it followeth that he who from indecision standeth still hath not so many chances of going astray as he who pusheth forwards"--a most clear and satisfactory exposition of the matter.  "Your prompt decision to attack," said General Grant on
|T|h|i|n|k| |I| |f|o|u|n|d| |s|o|m|e|t|h|i|n|g| |m|o|r|e| |a|n|n|o|y|i|n|g| |t|h|a|n| |h|a|s|h|t|a|g|s|
Me: doctor doctor I cant stop fucking farting... Doctor: *runs out the room comes back with a ten foot pole*Me: OMG!!!!!!! what are you gonna do with that??? Doctor: OPEN UP A FEW FUCKING WINDOWS
Teacher: Paul. Give me a sentence beginning with "I". Paul: I is the... Teacher: No, Paul . You must say "I am" not "I is." Paul: All right. I am the ninth letter of the alphabet.
In a restaurant: Customer: Waiter, waiter! There is a frog in my soup!!! In a restaurant: Customer: Waiter, waiter! There is a frog in my soup!!! Waiter: Sorry, sir. The fly is on vacation.
What a fuss people make about fidelity! Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing to do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful and are not; old men want to be faithless and cannot--that is all one can say.
Higgs Boson goes into a Catholic Church... The priest says, "you're not welcome here". Higgs Boson says "you can't have mass without me." . . . . . drrrrrrr dish! * Exit Stage Right *
It's quiet...too quiet... Did you hear about the woman who couldn't find a singing partner? She had to buy a duet yourself kit... *-drops mic-* *-mike jumps up and promptly kicks hatter in the shin-*
A dangerous disorder affecting high public functionaries who want to go fishing.  OWE, v.  To have (and to hold) a debt.  The word formerly signified not indebtedness, but possession; it meant "own," and in the minds of debtors there is still a good deal of confusion between assets and liabilities.
A mark impressed upon certain kinds of documents to attest their authenticity and authority.  Sometimes it is stamped upon wax, and attached to the paper, sometimes into the paper itself.  Sealing, in this sense, is a survival of an ancient custom of inscribing important papers with cabalistic words or signs to give them a magical efficacy independent of the authority that they represent.  In the British museum are preserved many ancient papers, mostly of a sacerdotal character, validated by necromantic
A sacred rite of such efficacy that he who finds himself in heaven without having undergone it will be unhappy forever.  It is performed with water in two ways--by immersion, or plunging, and by aspersion, or sprinkling.  But whether the plan of immersion Is better than simple aspersion Let those immersed And those aspersed Decide by the Authorized Version, And by matching their agues tertian.  G.J.
Hey, how many people do you think are dead in that cemetary Dad: "Hey, how many people do you think are dead in that cemetary Me: "It's gotta be a couple thousand, pop." Dad: "All of them."
Sudden, without ceremony, like the arrival of a cannon- shot and the departure of the soldier whose interests are most affected by it.  Dr. Samuel Johnson beautifully said of another author's ideas that they were "concatenated without abruption."  ABSCOND, v.i.  To "move in a mysterious way," commonly with the property of another.  Spring beckons!  All things to the call respond; The trees are leaving and cashiers abscond
An isolated suburban spot where mourners match lies, poets write at a target and stone-cutters spell for a wager.  The inscriptions following will serve to illustrate the success attained in these Olympian games:  His virtues were so conspicuous that his enemies, unable to overlook them, denied them, and his friends, to whose loose lives they were a rebuke, represented them as vices. They are here commemorated by his family, who shared them.  In the earth we here
"HI DO YOU WANT TO DRESS UP NICE SO WE CAN QUEUE OUTSIDE A CLUB & GET INSIDE & QUEUE UP TO BUY A DRINK & THEN QUEUE UP TO GO TO THE TOILET?"
Me: C'mon. Dog: No. Me: Let's go. Dog: No. Me: Please? Dog: YOU TRYING TO KILL ME?!? Me: It's just rain. Dog: I already pooped in your shoe.
A man walks into a crowded bar brandishing a gun... The man yells out "WHOS BEEN SLEEPING WITH MY WIFE???" A few moments later, a man in the back yells back "YOU DONT HAVE ENOUGH BULLETS!".
You don't know what an existence they lead down there. It is pure, unadulterated country life. They get up early because they have so much to do, and go to bed early because they have so little to think about.
[3 AM] 5yo: *sobbing* Daddy Me: Ughhh..yes, sweetheart, what's wrong? 5yo: I'm lonely... Me: Then, don't ever get married. 5yo: Ok, Daddy.
My dad's take on 35 years of marriage. Me: "Mom and Dad, how does it feel to have been married for 35 years?" Dad: "Well, it only seems like it's been 5 minutes..." Mom: "Awww!" Dad: "...Underwater."
Consider further: it is a praise service; a service of compliment, of flattery, of adulation! Do you ask who it is that is willing to endure this strange compliment, this insane compliment; and who not only endures it, but likes it, enjoys it, requires if, commands it? Hold your breath!
The room is 15$ a night. Innkeeper: The room is $15 a night. It's $5 if you make your own bed. Guest: I'll make my own bed. Innkeeper: Good. I'll get you some nails and wood.
peanut Little Sally: Mommy, Mommy, Little Frankie showed me his penis on the playground! It reminded me of a peanut! Mommy (startled): Oh! Was it really small? Little Sally: No, it was salty!
For there is nothing about man that is not strange to an immortal. He looks at nothing as we look at it, his sense of proportion is quite different from ours, and his sense of values is so widely divergent from ours, that with all our large intellectual powers it is not likely that even the most gifted among us would ever be quite able to understand it.
Wife: What r u doing? Husband: Killing mosquitoes. Wife: How many did u kill? Husband: Total 5. Two female, 3 males. Wife: How do u know their genders? Husband: 2 near mirror and 3 near beer.
Knock, knock... Chicken combo... Why did the chicken cross the road? *I don't know. Why did the chicken cross the road?* To go and see ugly... Knock, Knock *Who's there?* **The chicken**
Two gerbils....(NSFW) ...are walking down the street and come up to a gay bar. One turns to his friend and asks. &gt;Wanna go inside and get shit faced? Lemmiwinks is your clue.
B: If you have a sore throat... B: ...I can lend you my throat medicine. G: Throat medicine, huh? B: IT'S NOT WHAT YOU THINK G: Uh huh B: IT'S CEPACOL G: Weird name to call your dick.
It's a SHOT in the dark, but you might find this funny. Why did the bros take a shot of alcohol together? Because if one bro takes a shot, the other takes a slug! #Bromanceforlife #Dietogether
Two newborns are having a conversation... 1: You look worried. What's wrong? 2: It's about my Dad. 1: What about him? 2: I saw him with Mom last night. I think he's stealing my milk.
I AM THE BOSS DO NOT FORGOT Boss hangs a poster in Office "I AM THE BOSS, DO NOT FORGET" He returns from lunch, finds a slip on his desk. "Ur wife called, she wants her poster back home."
"Doctor, I have an embarrassing medical problem..." NSFW Well, what is it?" asks the doctor. "I have five penises." "Five penises!," exclaims the doctor, "How does your underwear fit?" "Like a glove!"
A dad walks into his son's room... A dad walks into his son's room and says: "Son, how many times have I told you... If you keep masturbating, you'll go blind." The son responds: "Dad! I'm over here."
A cowboy goes into a shop to buy condoms Cowboy: "Give me 3 packets of condoms, please." Cashier: "Do you need a paper bag with that, sir?" Cowboy: "Nah.. She's purty good lookin'....."
Officer: Soldier do you have change for a dollar? Soldier: Sure buddy. Officer: That's no way to address an officer! Now let's try it again. Soldier do you have change for a dollar? Soldier: No SIR!
A comely female inhabiting the Mohammedan Paradise to make things cheery for the good Mussulman, whose belief in her existence marks a noble discontent with his earthly spouse, whom he denies a soul.  By that good lady the Houris are said to be held in deficient esteem.
The part of the world lying west (or east) of the Orient.  It is largely inhabited by Christians, a powerful subtribe of the Hypocrites, whose principal industries are murder and cheating, which they are pleased to call "war" and "commerce."  These, also, are the principal industries of the Orient.
A pirate walks into a bar With a steering wheel attached to his belt. Confused, the bartender asks the man "Hey buddy, what's up with the wheel?" The pirate replies "Aaaargh, it's drivin' me nuts!"
Honey, I just won the lottery! -- Honey, I just won the lottery! Pack some suitcases! -- That's fantastic! Should I pack summer or winter clothing? -- I don't care, but I want you gone by tomorrow!
So I asked my friend, "I hear your husband applied for a position in the government" Me:"What is he doing now?" Friend: "Nothing" Me: "But I thought he got the job!?" Friend: "Yes he did."
A Potomac tribesman who exchanged the privilege of governing himself for the advantage of good government.  In justice to him it should be said that he did not want to.  They took away his vote and gave instead The right, when he had earned, to _eat_ his bread. In vain--he clamors for his "boss," pour soul, To come again and part him from his roll.  Offenbach Stutz
Oedipus teasing... Oedipus passes near the hill and sees Sisyphus rolling the boulder up that hill. Oedipus (to Sisyphus): How's it goin'? Sisyphus: Shut up, motherfucker.
The ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  It is distinguished from the corpuscle, also the ultimate, indivisible unit of matter, by a closer resemblance to the atom, also the ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  Three great scientific theories of the structure of the universe are the molecular, the corpuscular and the atomic.  A fourth affirms, with Haeckel, the condensation of precipitation of matter from ether--whose existence is proved by the condensation
It is because they do not think at all; they only think they think. Whereas they can't think; not two human beings in ten thousand have anything to think with. And as to imagination -- oh, well, look at their heaven! They accept it, they approve it, they admire it. That gives you their intellectual measure.
The head of a church, especially a State church supported by involuntary contributions.  The Primate of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury, an amiable old gentleman, who occupies Lambeth Palace when living and Westminster Abbey when dead.  He is commonly dead.
Two women were talking, one says to the other " can you believe it, the other day Some one said I was ugly." "Don't worry I've been told worse" "Oh yeah? Like what?" " that you"re also a slut"
Learning--particularly that sort which is not derived from a regular course of instruction but comes of the reading of occult books, or by nature.  This latter is commonly designated as folk-lore and embraces popularly myths and superstitions.  In Baring-Gould's _Curious Myths of the Middle Ages_ the reader will find many of these traced backward, through various peoples on converging lines, toward a common origin in remote antiquity.  Among these are the fables of "
Imperfectly sensible to distinctions among things.  "You tiresome man!" cried Indolentio's wife, "You've grown indifferent to all in life." "Indifferent?" he drawled with a slow smile; "I would be, dear, but it is not worth while."  Apuleius M. Gokul
To shorten.  When in the course of human events it becomes necessary for people to abridge their king, a decent respect for the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.  Oliver Cromwell
A pirate walks into a bar... A pirate walks into a bar and the bartender says, "Hey, you know you have a steering wheel between you legs right?" The pirate replies, "Arrrr, Matey! It drives me nuts!"
There are three fourth graders, a white boy, a black boy, and an asian boy. Who have the biggest dick? The black kid. Cause he's 21. People here get butthurt by the simplest jokes. Good lord.
[spelling bee] Judge: Your word is McConaughey McConaughey. M-C-C-O-N-A-U-G-H-E-Y, McConaughey. Did I get it? Judge: We have no idea
GF: You cant keep it. ME: But- G: Its a BEE. M: HES my FRIEND! G: Hand him over. M: No! [tearing up] I wont let you hurt Albuzz Bumbledore!
Son: "Mom, Dad... I'm gay" Mom: *staring at dad Dad: *clenches fists Mom: ...don't! Dad: *sweats profusely Mom: Dad: HI GAY, I'M DAD
Desire and expectation rolled into one.  Delicious Hope! when naught to man is left-- Of fortune destitute, of friends bereft; When even his dog deserts him, and his goat With tranquil disaffection chews his coat While yet it hangs upon his back; then thou, The star far-flaming on thine angel brow, Descendest, radiant, from the skies to hint The promise of a clerkship in the Mint.  Fogarty Weffing
Easy way to earn karma points on /r/jokes? Options are: 1) Crack a witty comment 2) Link to /r/dadjokes 3) Submit a damn joke and the answer is.....drumroll...... just reply with a "whoosh", simple!
Cat Extended Joke Must read This cat, is cat, a cat, good cat, way cat, to cat, keep cat, a cat, idiot cat, busy cat, for cat, 20 cat, seconds cat! Now read it all without the word cat!
A Day in the life of John Dillon. My name is John Dillon, I do all the killin', I make 5 Dollars Day. I see a Girl named kitty and she shows me her titties and she takes my 5 Dollars away.
A knock knock joke for when your SO is on her period. Knock knock. Who's there? Mr. Tampon. Mr. Tampon who? You bloody well know who I am. (For best effect, physically knock on her pubic region)
[1st date] Her: I love quail Me: Omg me too! H: Love Cher M: Omg me too! H: Love men Me: Omg me too! H: Love Pepsi M: WTF is wrong with you?
Man to very beautiful airhostess:- "What's your name?" Air hostess:- "Eva Benz.." Man :- "Lovely name...any relation to Mercedes Benz?" Air hostess:- (smiling) "maintenance cost is same" :D
It has often been made a subject of reproach against artists and men of letters that they are lacking in wholeness and completeness of nature. As a rule this must necessarily be so. That very concentration of vision and inversity of purpose which is the characteristic of the artistic temperament is in itself a mode of limitation. To those who are preoccupied with the beauty of form nothing else seems of so much importance.
Pedophile Jokes? I got 3: If they can cross the street they can take the meat. If they can pee they're old enough for me. I'm like a game boy, kids turn me on. You guys got any others?
HER:He doesn't trust me. THERAPIST:How so? HER:He's always spying on me. ME (dressed as Therapist):Really? THERAPIST:WTF HER:WTF ME:WTF
Nurse: "Oh jeez, was that you that fell 20 ft out of the tree?" I don't know, I wasn't counting. Not much of a joke but it was hilarious when my grandpa said it at the hospital (happened to him ofc).
What do you call a deer with no eyes? Q: What do you call a deer with no eyes? A: No idee-er. (idea) Q: What do you call a deer with no eyes and no legs? A: Still no idee-er.
'Here's a good book' said the sales assistant in the book shop to Mrs Monster. 'How To Help Your Husband Get Ahead.' 'No thank you' said Mrs Monster. 'My husband's got two heads already. . .'
A portable sheath in which the ancient statesman and the aboriginal lawyer carried their lighter arguments.  He extracted from his quiver, Did the controversial Roman, An argument well fitted To the question as submitted, Then addressed it to the liver, Of the unpersuaded foeman.  Oglum P. Boomp
A tall vegetable intended by nature to serve as a penal apparatus, though through a miscarriage of justice most trees bear only a negligible fruit, or none at all.  When naturally fruited, the tree is a beneficient agency of civilization and an important factor in public morals.  In the stern West and the sensitive South its fruit (white and black respectively) though not eaten, is agreeable to the public taste and, though not exported, profitable to the general welfare.  That the legitimate relation of
No, that is not strictly true. The Indian was more merciful than was the Father of Mercies. He sold no virgins into slavery to minister to the lusts of the murderers of their kindred while their sad lives might last; he raped them, then charitably made their subsequent sufferings brief, ending them with the precious gift of death. He burned some of the houses, but not all of them. He carried out innocent dumb brutes, but he took the lives of none.
To make an ingrate.  BEG, v.  To ask for something with an earnestness proportioned to the belief that it will not be given.  Who is that, father? A mendicant, child, Haggard, morose, and unaffable--wild! See how he glares through the bars of his cell! With Citizen Mendicant all is not well.  Why did they put him there, father?  Because Obeying his belly he
Guy walks up to his wife with a duck under his arm... "Honey. This is the pig I've been fucking for the last ten years." "That's not a pig, it's a duck!" "I was talking to the duck."
Me: *tied up* Guy: *hits my kneecap* M: I'm not a rat! G: Bring in her sworn enemy! G2: *tosses Rubik's Cube at me* M: Oh god no! I'll talk!
THE ROOSTER ALSO CALLED A COCK LOVES THE KITTY WET THE CAT FALLS INTO A BUCKET OF WATER THE ROOSTER LAUGHS THE MORAL OF THE STORY IS A COCK LIKES A WET PUSSY.
Fisherman got jokes... A little fish humor for everyone. "Did you do that on Porpoise? Or just for the Halibut?" "Oh my Cod, save my Sole!" "You sucker, that smelt, so get your bass out of here!"
The area of a pie So I asked my maths teacher how to find the area of the pie I had made that day. He said, easy, you use the are formula A=r2. I said, no this is a circular pie.
What do you call the first Afghan off the boat? Amhere. What do you call the second Afghan off the boat? Amhere Azwel. What do you call the third Afghan off the boat? Amhere Azwell Azhim. :)
Exemption from the stress of authority in a beggarly half dozen of restraint's infinite multitude of methods.  A political condition that every nation supposes itself to enjoy in virtual monopoly.  Liberty.  The distinction between freedom and liberty is not accurately known; naturalists have never been able to find a living specimen of either.  Freedom, as every schoolboy knows, Once shrieked as Kosciusko fell; On every wind, indeed, that blows I hear her yell.
Words have not merely music as sweet as that of viol and lute, colour as rich and vivid as any that makes lovely for us the canvas of the Venetian or the Spaniard, and plastic form no less sure and certain than that which reveals itself in marble or in bronze, but thought and passion and spirituality are theirs also--are theirs, indeed, alone.
The new smart refrigerator not only suggests recipes based on what's inside but also judges your dietary choices. "Are you sure you want another midnight snack?" it asks, before recommending a salad you won't make anyway.
A relation into which fools are providentially drawn for their mutual destruction.  Two Seidlitz powders, one in blue And one in white, together drew And having each a pleasant sense Of t'other powder's excellence, Forsook their jackets for the snug Enjoyment of a common mug. So close their intimacy grew One paper would have held the two. To confidences straight they fell, Less anxious each to hear than tell; Then each remorsefully confessed To all the virtues he
A distemper of youth, curable by small doses of repentance in connection with outward applications of experience. Byron, who recovered long enough to call it "entuzy-muzy," had a relapse, which carried him off--to Missolonghi.
Dedicated to some religious purpose; having a divine character; inspiring solemn thoughts or emotions; as, the Dalai Lama of Thibet; the Moogum of M'bwango; the temple of Apes in Ceylon; the Cow in India; the Crocodile, the Cat and the Onion of ancient Egypt; the Mufti of Moosh; the hair of the dog that bit Noah, etc.  All things are either sacred or profane. The former to ecc
The tenure by which a religious corporation holds lands on condition of praying for the soul of the donor.  In mediaeval times many of the wealthiest fraternities obtained their estates in this simple and cheap manner, and once when Henry VIII of England sent an officer to confiscate certain vast possessions which a fraternity of monks held by frankalmoigne, "What!" said the Prior, "would your master stay our benefactor's soul in Purgatory?"  "Ay," said the officer, cold
Jesus and his disciples walk into a restaurant. Jesus: A table for 26, please. Headwaiter: But there's only . . . um, 13 of you. Jesus: Yeah, we're all going to sit on the same side.
To present your neighbor with another and better error than the one which he has deemed it advantageous to embrace.  DISCRIMINATE, v.i.  To note the particulars in which one person or thing is, if possible, more objectionable than another.
Lightbulbs in Magaluf What type of lightbulbs go clubbing in Magaluf*? LEDs (*Note for any US viewers Magaluf is a popular destination in Spain for Brits that go on massive drinking/clubbing holidays)
*on the subway* CUTE GUY: [mouths "hi"] PRETTY GIRL: [mouths "hi" back] ME, IN BETWEEN THEM: [exaggeratedly mouths "YOU GUYS LIKE HOTDOGS"]
A man walks up to a girl in a bar and says "You remind me of my little toe" . She says, "Is that because I'm small and cute?" He says, "No, its because I'm going to bang you on the table later"
*Ouija board begins spelling* H-A-V-E_S-O-M-E "Ooooh, spooky" G-R-A-N-D-C-H-I-L-D-R-E-N "Dammit Grandma, haunt someone else"
look son... rome wasnt built in Ade!! rome was built in I-TA-LY. do u even kno where Ade is?! A-FRI-CA. AFRICA. how r u goimg to pass school
A kangaroo walks into a bar. He orders a beer. The bartender says, That'll be $10. You know, we don't get many kangaroos coming in here. The kangaroo says, At $10 a beer, it's not hard to understand.
An oiling, or greasing.  The rite of extreme unction consists in touching with oil consecrated by a bishop several parts of the body of one engaged in dying.  Marbury relates that after the rite had been administered to a certain wicked English nobleman it was discovered that the oil had not been properly consecrated and no other could be obtained.  When informed of this the sick man said in anger: "Then I'll be damned if I die!"  "My son,"
A man goes to a psychiatrist "Doctor, I don't know what to do. My wife thinks she's a piano." Doctor says "Well, bring her in." "Are you *nuts*? Do you know what it costs to move a piano?"
Someone stole my copy of Microsoft Word. Whoever stole my copy of Microsoft Word, I'll track you down. You have my Word. EDIT: I saw this on /r/puns and reposted it here. I Excel at reposting.
Hitler on mining "Sir, we are mining too many useless ores" [Hitler rubs chin] "So mine less" [Grammar Nazi bursts through the door] "MINE FEWER!" [Hitler looks up] "Yes?"
DRAKE: I'll drop the best album of 2016. BEYONCE: Nah. DRAKE: The best album of... April? BEYONCE: Nah. DRAKE: Please don't do this to me.
[Putting petrol in car] 19.95 19.96 19.97 [stops] [gently now] 19.98 [very gently] 19.99 [ok, once more] [deep breath] 37.83 GODDAMMIT
An animal (now extinct) which was half horse and half griffin.  The griffin was itself a compound creature, half lion and half eagle.  The hippogriff was actually, therefore, a one-quarter eagle, which is two dollars and fifty cents in gold.  The study of zoology is full of surprises.
A man walks into a hospital feeling unwell and the doctor says: "Sorry, you've only got three minutes to live." The man said: "Can you do something for me?" "Yes," he said. "I'll boil you an egg."
That which sternly impels us in the direction of profit, along the line of desire.  Sir Lavender Portwine, in favor at court, Was wroth at his master, who'd kissed Lady Port. His anger provoked him to take the king's head, But duty prevailed, and he took the king's bread, Instead.  G.J.     E   EAT, v.i.  To perform successively (and successfully) the functions of
Seenus trouble Dad: Son, I have seenus trouble. Me: Seenus? Dont you mean sinus trouble, pops? Dad: No, son. Seenus, I was out with my girlfriend and your mom seenus.
That is the law of God, as revealed in her make. What becomes of this high privilege? Does she live in free enjoyment of it? No. Nowhere in the whole world. She is robbed of it everywhere. Who does this? Man. Man's statutes -- if the Bible is the Word of God.
Exposed to a mutable ownership through vicissitudes of possession.  His light estate, if neither he did make it Nor yet its former guardian forsake it, Is portable improperty, I take it.  Worgum Slupsky
Suitable for drinking.  Water is said to be potable; indeed, some declare it our natural beverage, although even they find it palatable only when suffering from the recurrent disorder known as thirst, for which it is a medicine.  Upon nothing has so great and diligent ingenuity been brought to bear in all ages and in all countries, except the most uncivilized, as upon the invention of substitutes for water.  To hold that this general aversion to that liquid has no basis in the
An elderly lady whom you do not happen to like; sometimes called, also, a hen, or cat.  Old witches, sorceresses, etc., were called hags from the belief that their heads were surrounded by a kind of baleful lumination or nimbus--hag being the popular name of that peculiar electrical light sometimes observed in the hair.  At one time hag was not a word of reproach:  Drayton speaks of a "beautiful hag,
"I need to find somewhere to park," I told my wife. "What about over there?" she said. "I can't," I replied, "It says between 1 and 9 only." "Well, why is that stopping you?" "I'm 23."
TIP FOR MEN TIPS 4 mEN . . . . . . . . . If you marry one girl, she will fight WITH you. . . But . . If you marry with two girls, they will fight FOR you... Think different
A Russian went for an eye check up. The doctor showed him some letters on the board: CZWXNQSTAZKY "Can you read this?" The Russian responds, "Read? I even know this guy. He's my cousin."
People come up to me all the time in the street and they say to me, they say, "Joe, what's the difference between Hag Shavuot and Hag Ha-Katzir?" And I say to them, I say, "Oh, about fifty bucks."
A lowly virtue whereby mediocrity achieves an inglorious success.  "Persevere, persevere!" cry the homilists all, Themselves, day and night, persevering to bawl. "Remember the fable of tortoise and hare-- The one at the goal while the other is--where?" Why, back there in Dreamland, renewing his lease Of life, all his muscles preserving the peace, The goal and the rival forgotten alike, And the long
A person who pervades the domain of intellectual speculation and diffuses himself through the channels of moral activity.  He is omnific, omniform, omnipercipient, omniscient, omnipotent.  He it was who invented letters, printing, the railroad, the steamboat, the telegraph, the platitude and the circle of the sciences.  He created patriotism and taught the nations war--founded theology, philosophy, law, medicine and Chicago.  He established monarchical and
Unscramble these words Unscramble these words ! 1) PENSI 2) HITLRE 3) NIGGRE 4) BUTTSXE DO YOU GET SPINE,LITHER,GINGER AND SUBTEXT ?
"Brevity is the soul of wit, which is why I'm so verbose when I'm not funny." It's the irony of humor; the less you say, the more you're expected to be clever.
Two aardvarks watched in amazement as a  firework flashed across the sky. 1st aardvark: Wow! I wish I could fly like that. 2nd aardvark: You would if your tail was on fire.
How many women with PMS does it take to screw-in a light bulb? Two. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IT JUST DOES, OKAY?
You know all that talk about backseat  driving?  Well I've been driving all my life and can safely say that I've never heard a word from the back seat.  What kind of car do you drive?  A hearse!
How do you get an elephant into a Safeway grocery bag? You take the "S" out of safe and the "F" out of way. One of my all time faves. If you say it out loud it will make sense :D
'Calm Your Tits' is derogatory. Feminists reccomend, instead : 'De-stress the Breasts",'Soothe your Boobs', 'Give that Chest a Rest', 'Don't have a Rack Attack' and 'Hakuna the Tattas'
The _piece de resistance_ in the American political problem.  Representing him by the letter n, the Republicans begin to build their equation thus:  "Let n = the white man."  This, however, appears to give an unsatisfactory solution.
C3PO and R2D2 walk into a bar... Then the bartender goes "HEY!!! We don't serve YOUR KIND HERE!!!" C3PO asks: "Why because we're droids," Bartender: "NO!!! 'Cause It's AN OUTLET BAR!!!"
Grammar Nazi vs. Hitler Soldier:"Sir, we are mining too many useless ores." Hitler:"So mine less!" [Grammar Nazi busts in] "MINE FEWER" [Hitler looks up] "Yes?"
A woman wants to buy a pair of spectacles. A woman walks into a shop and says," Doctor, I think I need a pair of spectacles! " The shopkeeper replies," You certainly do ma'am! This is a grocery store.
I'm really upset that Vine is getting shut down, because I won't be able to use the phrase, "do it for the Vine" anymore... "Do it or I'll fucking kill you" just doesn't have the same ring to it.
An agency employed by civilized nations for the settlement of disputes which might become troublesome if left unadjusted.  By most writers the invention of gunpowder is ascribed to the Chinese, but not upon very convincing evidence.  Milton says it was invented by the devil to dispel angels with, and this opinion seems to derive some support from the scarcity of angels.  Moreover, it has the hearty concurrence of the Hon. James Wilson, Secretary of Agriculture.  Secretary Wilson became interested in gunpowder through
Wife: I heard you have a new secretary today? Husband:Yes. Wife:Is she smart? Husband:Yes. Wife:Is she pretty? Husband:Yes. Wife:How did she dress today? Husband:Very quickly.
Boy asks Girl.... Boy: Will you marry me? *girl slaps him* Girl: What did you say? *boy gets up and and slaps her twice* Boy: If you didn't hear what I said, then why did you slap me?
Yo mama's so fat... ...when she died, she had to be preserved in formalda-wide. She then had to be whipped creamated. If she wasn't, they would have had to given her an open-graveyard funeral.
To sick to work This guy phones in to work, tells his boss he is to sick to come. So the boss says, " Sorry to hear, how sick are you ? Guy replies, " Very, I'm in bed with my sister."
"Son, I want to let you know that you were adopted. "What?! Really?!", I said. "Yep! Go pack your things and get ready", my dad said. "They'll be here to pick you up in twenty minutes."
[spelling bee] JUDGE: Your word is "incorrect" KID: I haven't spelled it yet JUDGE: No, that's your word KID: T-H-A-T-'-S JUDGE: No- KID: N-
Son: Mom, dad, I'm gay. Mom: *gasp* Dad: *clenches fists* Mom: Honey, stop! Dad: *steps forward* Mom: N- Dad: HI GAY, I'M DAD.
THIS IS THE COPS. WE KNOW YOU HAVE NWA'S "FU*CK THE POLICE" ON REPEAT IN THERE. COME OUT & SAY SORRY TO OFFICER DAVIS. YOU MADE HIM CRY DUDE
*NSFW-ish* Two nuns Two nun's are crossing the road when a vampire jumps out. Nun 1 turns to Nun 2 and says "Quick, show him your cross" Nun 2 turns to the Vampire and says "Oi, Fuck off!"
TWITTER REHAB IS GOING GOOD YOU GUYS I GOT A NEW FRIEND HE HAS SPECIAL SUGAR AND IT'S AWESOME AND MY YARD HAS 3,957,268 BLADES OF GRASS!!!!
Eh wah eh wah eh wah eh wah joget joget joget joget joget gelek gelek gelek gelek gelek gelek lembek lembek lembek embek lembek lembek
Ennui, the state or condition of one that is bored.  Many fanciful derivations of the word have been affirmed, but so high an authority as Father Jape says that it comes from a very obvious source--the first words of the ancient Latin hymn _Te Deum Laudamus_.  In this apparently natural derivation there is something that saddens.
[aquarium] Me: "That's a lot of octopussies to occupy a tank." Guide: "it's octopi." Me: "Oh..that's a lot of octopussies to octopi a tank."
I ap-p-p-p-lied for a j-job as a r-r-r-radio an-n-nouncer. Sh-sh-shame on them, rej-jecting me because I'm b-b-b-black.
A person whose vices and follies are not sociable.  HERS, pron.  His.  HIBERNATE, v.i.  To pass the winter season in domestic seclusion. There have been many singular popular notions about the hibernation of various animals.  Many believe that the bear hibernates during the whole winter and subsists by mechanically sucking its paws.  It is admitted that it comes out of its retirement in the spring so lean that it had to
How to bargain with your wife Me: Can I get a motorcycle? Wife: No. Me: Can. I get a boat? Wife: NO! Me: Can I get a blowjob? Wife: (sighs) Is it a BIG boat?
Women 15 to 65 At 15, a girl is a SURPRISE. At 25, she is the RIGHT PRIZE. At 35,she is a GRAND PRIZE. At 45,she is a CONSOLATION PRIZE. At 55, she is a DOOR PRIZE, and at 65,she is a GIVEAWAY PRIZE
One who receives a benefit from another, or is otherwise an object of charity.  "All men are ingrates," sneered the cynic.  "Nay," The good philanthropist replied; "I did great service to a man one day Who never since has cursed me to repay, Nor vilified."  "Ho!" cried the cynic, "lead me to him straight-- With veneration I am overcome, And fain would have his blessing."  "Sad your fate
A fluid that serves the gods and goddesses in place of blood.  Fair Venus, speared by Diomed, Restrained the raging chief and said: "Behold, rash mortal, whom you've bled-- Your soul's stained white with ichorshed!"  Mary Doke
ME: Pet it OPTIMUS PRIME: But I'm afraid of it ME: It's just a dog OP: Oh..ok [reaches out] DOG: [sneezes] OP: [transforms into large truck]
A man hobbles into a McDonald's and walks up to the counter. He proceeds to place his order of 1 hot fudge sundae. The cashier asks him "Crushed nuts?". "No." He says, "Hip replacement".
"Daddy will u tuck me in?:)" "Ok" *tucks him in* "Daddy sing me a song:)" "Ok" *clears throat* LET THE BODIES HIT THE FLOOR LET THE BODIES H
PIGS A woman is walking her dog, when suddenly a man walks up to her. Man: "Where'd you get the pig"? Woman: "How DARE you call my dog that!" Man: "I was talking to the dog!"
Prostate exam  Okay, I'm going to give you a prostate exam.  ...  It won't hurt a bit...  Hey, doctor, you could have removed your ring!  It's not my ring, it's my watch...
After seeing his first ballet at age 6, his parents asked him how he liked it. It was good, but you know all those girls who were on their tippy-toes? Why don't they just get *taller girls?*
A social ceremony invented by the devil for the gratification of his servants and the plaguing of his enemies. The introduction attains its most malevolent development in this country, being, indeed, closely related to our political system. Every American being the equal of every other American, it follows that everybody has the right to know everybody else, which implies the right to introduce without request or permission. The Declaration of Independence should have read thus:  "We hold these truths to be self-evident:
Why do sharks circle their prey? "dad, why do the sharks swim in circles like that before they eat someone?" "it makes them taste better, son." "taste better? How? " "it scares the shit out of them."
A man lovingly told his fiance "I don't have a big house or a yacht like my friend, Harry, but I will love you forever." She replied, "Oh, yeah. I love you too. Now, who's this Harry?!"
China Joke So I was walking around the other day and I saw a Chinese guy fall out of a 2nd story window. I ran up and in English yelled, "Are you ok?!?" He replied, "I am fine, thank you, and you?"
*spills wine on Ouija board* OUIJA: *moving pointer by itself* H-E-Y S-S-E-X-Y D-Y-O-O-U-W-W-A-N-N-A M-A-K-E O-U-T ME: *moves pointer to NO*
I was talking to my Irish mate about Brad Pitt's films, but I could not remember the name of that historical Greek film he was in..... "Troy." he said, suddenly. "I am." I replied. "Give me a minute"
A guy goes to see a psychiatrist He's frantic. He says to the doctor, "I'm a wigwam, I'm a teepee, I'M A WIGWAM, I'M A TEEPEE!" The doctor says, "calm down, you're two tents."
An animal which strews its path with fainting women.  As in Rome Christians were thrown to the lions, so centuries earlier in Otumwee, the most ancient and famous city of the world, female heretics were thrown to the mice.  Jakak-Zotp, the historian, the only Otumwump whose writings have descended to us, says that these martyrs met their death with little dignity and much exertion.  He even attempts to exculp
One of the few characters of the Grecian mythology accorded recognition in the Hebrew.  (Leviticus, xvii, 7.)  The satyr was at first a member of the dissolute community acknowledging a loose allegiance with Dionysius, but underwent many transformations and improvements.  Not infrequently he is confounded with the faun, a later and decenter creation of the Romans, who was less like a man and more like a goat.
[Ouija board] O spirits, let me talk to m- C-O-N-N-E-C-T-I-N-G C-O-N-N-E-C-T-I-N-G C-O-N-N-E-C-T-I *squints* What the heck? A 3G board?
A windy day Three old ladies are sitting on a park bench. The first says to her friends "gosh, it's windy today". The second says "no, it's Thursday". The third says "so am I. Let's get a drink".
Why is it so hard to find Tylenol in the jungle? Because the parrots eat 'em all. . . . Explanation: Parrots eat 'em all = paracetamol = acetominophen = Tylenol
A Bagpiper, a Kangeroo, an Irish poet, and Mother Theresa walk into a bar . . . . . . . the barman, who was drying a glass, lifted his head and asked, "Is this some kind of joke?"
There are terrible temptations that it requires strength--strength and courage--to yield to. To stake all one's life on one throw--whether the stake be power or pleasure I care not--there is no weakness in that. There is a horrible, a terrible, courage.
Three positives Thursday afternoon in the office: Me: yay it's 1.45pm, Coworker: and it's Thursday, Me: three positives, Coworker: what's the third, Me: It's still cumming!
It is God! This race's god, I mean. He sits on his throne, attended by his four and twenty elders and some other dignitaries pertaining to his court, and looks out over his miles and miles of tempestuous worshipers, and smiles, and purrs, and nods his satisfaction northward, eastward, southward; as quaint and nave a spectacle as has yet been imagined in this universe, I take it.
Why are iPhones' batteries not called apple juice Because they don't have enough juice in them ^Explanation: ^circlejerk ^on ^iPhone's ^battery ^running ^out ^fast don't kill me pls, i love apple ^yay
student: may i use the bathroom? Teacher: as long as you can recite the alphabet. Student: abcdefghijklmnoqrstuvwxyz Teacher: wheres the p? Student: running down my leg.
An action of the mind whereby we obtain a clearer view of our relation to the things of yesterday and are able to avoid the perils that we shall not again encounter.  REFORM, v.  A thing that mostly satisfies reformers opposed to reformation.
UPCOMING JESUS APPERANCES 8/3 Pancake, Norfolk, VA 8/10 Cheeto, Salem, OR 8/19 Window stain, Orem, UT 8/23 Vegemite Jar, Perth, AU
So an old-timer goes out for breakfast... And the young whippersnapper of a waiter asks "What will you have, Sir?" "Bacon my day, sonny!" [Sorry/notsorry - it's how my mind works]
The Great Wall of China was not built to keep out invaders but was actually an ancient attempt at creating the world's longest game of hide and seek. Unfortunately, the game ended when someone misplaced the rules, and now we're all just hiding from the concept of exercise.
4: *hops in my lap* Mama, look at my picture! Me: Love it 4: See green M: Yep 4: And blue M: Mmhm 4: And red M: *flushes toilet* ok, hop up.
Evidence having a shade more of plausibility than of unlikelihood.  The testimony of two credible witnesses as opposed to that of only one.  PROOF-READER, n.  A malefactor who atones for making your writing nonsense by permitting the compositor to make it unintelligible.
Will you get mad? Wife: *Honey, do I look fat in this dress?* Husband: *Will you get mad if I tell you the truth?* Wife: *No, silly. Of course not* Husband: *I slept with your sister*
ascent bpo, ascent bpo services, ascent bpo services pvt ltd ascent bpo, ascent bpo services, ascent bpo services pvt ltd ascent bpo, ascent bpo services, ascent bpo services pvt ltd
An automatic, muscular blood-pump.  Figuratively, this useful organ is said to be the seat of emotions and sentiments--a very pretty fancy which, however, is nothing but a survival of a once universal belief.  It is now known that the sentiments and emotions reside in the stomach, being evolved from food by chemical action of the gastric fluid.  The exact process by which a beefsteak becomes a feeling--tender or not, according to the age of the
One of Imagination's most precious possessions.  The rising People, hot and out of breath, Roared around the palace:  "Liberty or death!" "If death will do," the King said, "let me reign; You'll have, I'm sure, no reason to complain."  Martha Braymance
JESUS: heaven... must be missing an angel ME: o gee thamk u jesus ur so sweet JESUS: hehe ME: hehe JESUS: time to send u back ME: wait no what
Results followed. By the name of Cain and Abel. And these had some sisters; and knew what to do with them. And so there were some more results: Cain and Abel begot some nephews and nieces. These, in their turn, begot some second cousins. At this point classification of relationships began to get difficult, and the attempt to keep it up was abandoned.
Greek Tailor's Shop A Greek man walks into a Greek tailor shop holding a pair of jeans. The blind old tailor squints at him. "Euripedes?" The man nods and holds up the pants. "Eumenedes?"
As long as a thing is useful or necessary to us or affects us in any way, either for pain or pleasure, or appeals strongly to our sympathies or is a vital part of the environment in which we live, it is outside the proper sphere of art.
I Hate everyone! Angry guy: I HATE EVERYONE Random guy: Sir, how can you hate me? You dont even know me.. Angry guy: Hello my name is George.. Random Guy: Im Max.. George: OK, now fuck you Max
In the midst of one of these celebrations they heard God walking among the bushes, which was an afternoon custom of his, and they were smitten with fright. Why? Because they were naked. They had not known it before. They had not minded it before; neither had God.
Is that sick enough for you?! I man calls in sick to work. His boss thinks he sounds fine so he says, "You don't sound sick." Man, "IM FUCKING MY SISTER! IS THAT SICK ENOUGH FOR YOU!?"
Separateness, as, lands in severalty, i.e., lands held individually, not in joint ownership.  Certain tribes of Indians are believed now to be sufficiently civilized to have in severalty the lands that they have hitherto held as tribal organizations, and could not sell to the Whites for waxen beads and potato whiskey.  Lo! the poor Indian whose unsuited mind Saw death before, hell and the grave behind; Whom thrifty settler ne'er besought to stay
Modern pictures are, no doubt, delightful to look at. At least, some of them are. But they are quite impossible to live with; they are too clever, too assertive, too intellectual. Their meaning is too obvious and their method too clearly defined. One exhausts what they have to say in a very short time, and then they become as tedious as one's relations.
Mouse and elephant are on their way to the pool. *Told* *by* *my* *adorable* *niece.* Elephant: Bollox! I forgot my swim trunks! Mouse: Don't worry, I brought a spare.
When you feel sad When u feel sad.... To cheer up just go to the mirror and say, "damn I am really so cute" u will overcome your sadness. But don't make this a habit..... Coz liars go to hell !!!!
So a pope, a pedophile, and a rapist walks into a bar... He asks for a drink. ^^^^Take ^^^^as ^^^^much ^^^^time ^^^^as ^^^^you ^^^^need ^^^^to ^^^^think ^^^^about ^^^^it...
Two cows are standing next to each other in a field... Daisy says to Dolly, "I was artificially inseminated this morning." "I don't believe you," says Dolly. Daisy exclaims, "It's true, no bull!"
In the multiplex theism of certain Christian churches, three entirely distinct deities consistent with only one.  Subordinate deities of the polytheistic faith, such as devils and angels, are not dowered with the power of combination, and must urge individually their claims to adoration and propitiation.  The Trinity is one of the most sublime mysteries of our holy religion.  In rejecting it because it is incomprehensible, Unitarians betray their inadequate sense of theological fundamentals.  In religion we
HOLD YOUR HORSES. TELL YOUR HORSES YOU LOVE THEM. DONT BE TOO STRICT WITH YOUR HORSES OR THEY'LL DATE OLDER HORSES GET TATTOOS & HAVE PONIES
A love letter from a biscuit maker to a girl: Dear marie, today is good day, you are anmol for me, But u have crack jacked my heart, because i have a little heart, And now i m in 50/50 position.
Deer Two deer were frolicking in a field and then a wolf came by. One of the deer said to the wolf, "Are you here to kill us, Mr. Wolf?'' And the wolf said, "No, for you are both dear unto me."
"First things first I'm the illest. Drop this &amp; let the whole world feel it, and I'm still in the Murda Bizness I could hold you down like I'm givin' lessons in killin' "-Ebola
Fine, you drive. I won't tell you how. I'll just yell WE'RE GONNA DIE WE'RE GONNA DIE! I'M GONNA THROW UP AND WE'RE GONNA DIE til we arrive.
How many animals? We do not know. But it was under five thousand, for that was the largest number ever gathered for those Roman shows, and it was Titus, not Symmachus, who made that collection. Those were mere baby museums, compared to Noah's contract. Of birds and beasts and fresh-water creatures he had to collect 146,000 kinds; and of insects upwards of two million species.
A Czech one: God is carrying a bag of dicks... ...when he suddenly trips over a rock and all the dicks fall out. He gets pissed off: "I'm not going to pick them up, Prague's going to be here!"
Deliverance of sinners from the penalty of their sin, through their murder of the deity against whom they sinned.  The doctrine of Redemption is the fundamental mystery of our holy religion, and whoso believeth in it shall not perish, but have everlasting life in which to try to understand it.  We must awake Man's spirit from his sin, And take some special measure for redeeming it; Though hard indeed the task to get it in Among the angels any way but teaming it
So a homeless man comes up to us... "If I tell you a funny joke, would you pay me a quarter?" My pal from Rhode Island say in a thick northeastern accent: "I gotta funny joke fo' yah... Yah homeless."
Wrinkle Cream My nine-year-old daughter walked in while I was getting ready for work. "What are you doing?" she asked. "Putting on my wrinkle cream," I answered. "Oh," she said, walking away. "
Can anyone explain this joke for me? I just don't get it, so it is either meant to be absurd/nonsensical or I am missing historical context: Q:What do you know about Damascus? A:It kills 99% of germs.
There are three kinds of despots. There is the despot who tyrannises over the body. There is the despot who tyrannises over the soul. There is the despot who tyrannises over soul and body alike. The first is called the prince. The second is called the pope. The third is called the people.
5 dicks So I was at a bar and couldn't help but notice the guy next to me was pissing with 5 dicks. I was like "Krakens! How do those even fit in your pants?" He replied "They fit like a glove."
[PHONE] "TSA, How can I help you?" Me: "Why did you guys put my frog on the No-Fly List?!" Agent: "Umm..." Me: "DAMMIT, HE'S STARVING!"
A kind of cosmetic greatly affected by the ladies, whom it greatly affects in turn.  "Eat arsenic?  Yes, all you get," Consenting, he did speak up; "'Tis better you should eat it, pet, Than put it in my teacup."  Joel Huck
A soldierly compound of vanity, duty and the gambler's hope.  "Why have you halted?" roared the commander of a division and Chickamauga, who had ordered a charge; "move forward, sir, at once."  "General," said the commander of the delinquent brigade, "I am persuaded that any further display of valor by my troops will bring them into collision with the enemy."
Son, do we have any dop Ted? son: what's a "dop Ted"? dad: you are, you are adopted!! son: ... Nice one dad. dad: I'm not your dad. (Dad joke at its finest, credit: Kris Wilson)
"Can I touch it?" A little boy and a little girl are in the bathtub together. The little girl looks down at the boy and asks, "Can I touch it?" He answers, "No way -- you already broke yours off!"
[In a seahorse home] Son: Dad? Dad: Yes? Son: Happy M- Dad: DON'T Son: Moth- Dad: STOP Son: HAPPY MOTHERS DAY *Dad bangs head on desk*
A beautiful woman approaches a man in a bar... A beautiful woman approaches a man in a bar and says, "hey, big boy. You single?" He says, "yeah! How'd you know?" "You're fucking ugly, for starters."
"Dad, I cant sleep." Dad: [enters chugging a Monster] SLEEP IS DEAD. GET A JOB. "Dad Im seven-" Dad: SO WERE THE DWARVES BUT THEY HAD JOBS.
Australia is doing phenomenally on the Olympic medal tally considering our population #1. USA: 318.9 million #2. China: 1.357 billion #3. Japan: 173.3 million #4. Australia: 48 as of last census
Shall you grant that he foresaw all this? The pulpit grants it. It is the same as granting that in the matter of intellect the Deity is the Head Pauper of the Universe, and that in the matter of morals and character he is away down on the level of David.
Dams. The only thing that holds back liquid better... Is the idea of using a port-a-potty. "Look, I know my pants are brownening and getting wet, but I'll just wait forever -- I CANNOT go in there."
A pirate crew is fleeing from a whaling ship One pirate swabbie asks, "This be the whaling ship driven by the wench with two vaginas?" The pirate says, "Aye, we best be wary of har poons."
There's no easy way to say this... FJdnfiouadp, djfpiocu aneouidf, acnslikfiucukuokjpqukd. Diuoiufpqknddiolololdiodoodlioaidoiucnbnzquznd. Qudfiout'z'ndfjoikcugh.
Jokes Friend1:- Why Do You Break-Up With Her . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Friend2:- Mujhe Kutta Kutta Kahti Thi Or Apne Kutte Ko BABU.. grin.png
What do you call a waffle you drop in the desert? San Diego ^^San-dee-eygo ^^^^sandee-eygo ^^^^^sandy-eggo ^^^^^i'll ^^^^let^^^^myself^^^^out
Knock Knock Joke (created by a 4yo) Knock knock - Who's there? Apple - Apple who? *pause* APPLE NOTHING! APPLES DON'T SAY ANYTHING! YOU'RE SO WEIRD, DADDY!
My 7 year old told us some nut jokes. What do you call a nut on a wall? A walnut! What do you call a nut at the beach? A beech nut! What do you call a nut in the toilet? A peanut!!
Big vote today in England. If Leave wins I predict : Brexit to be followed by Grexit. Departugal. Italeave. Fruckoff. Czechout. Oustria. Finish. Slovakout. Latervia. Byegium
A priest, a nun, a rabbi, a blonde, a brunette, a redhead, a farmer, his daughter, a horse, a black guy, a white guy, and an asian guy all walk into a bar. The bartender says, "What is this? A joke?"
*dinosaur at zoo roars at me* "ROAR" whoa wat kimd of dinosaur is this "GROWL" hmm "SHOUT" hmmm "YELL" hmmmmm "HOLLER" oh its a thesaurus
[restaurant] WAITER: [brings bill] ME: I got this DATE: Thanks ME: [gets out piggy bank] [hits it w/ hammer] [it is filled w/ bees] ME: RUN
Birth Paddy's wife was ready to give birth so he rushes her to hospital.On arrival the nurse asks "How dilated is she?"To which paddy relies,"Oh Jaysus we"re both over the fucking moon!!..:)
Aspirin Before climbing into bed, a man sets down a glass of water and an aspirin on his wife's bedside table. "What's this for? I don't have a headache" she says. "Good. Let's fuck."
What were they for -- according to this idea? To furnish light for this little toy-world. That was his whole purpose; he had no other. One of the twenty million suns (the smallest one) was to light it in the daytime, the rest were to help one of the universe's countless moons modify the darkness of its nights.
A mendicant friar of the order of Mount Carmel.  As Death was a-riding out one day, Across Mount Carmel he took his way, Where he met a mendicant monk, Some three or four quarters drunk, With a holy leer and a pious grin, Ragged and fat and as saucy as sin, Who held out his hands and cried: "Give, give in Charity's name, I pray. Give in the name of the Church
*At the ouija board* Me: Err... mom? Can't we just... Ouija board: A-N-D A-N-O-T-H-E-R T-H-I-N-G
A Girl To Doctor: When I Smoke Cigarette, I Feel Very Uncomfortable, On First Puff, I Put Off My Shoes. On Second, My Socks. On Third, My Shirt. Doctor: Take This Cigarette And Tell Me In Detail.
2 P R D R D R 2 R D R 2 1 P R D R 2 1 P D R D R D P 2 R D D R D R 2 1 P R D R 2 1 P D R D R 2 1 P D R D R D P 2 R D R D R 2 1 P R D R 2 1 P D R P R D R 2 1 P D R D R D P 2 A girl trying to park a car
The Second Person of the secular Trinity.  FLOP, v.  Suddenly to change one's opinions and go over to another party.  The most notable flop on record was that of Saul of Tarsus, who has been severely criticised as a turn-coat by some of our partisan journals.  FLY-SPECK, n.  The prototype of punctuation.  It is observed by Garvinus that the systems of punctuation in use by the various literary nations depended
Teacher- "what does a chicken give you?" Students- "Meat!" Teacher- "Good! Now what does the pig give you?" Students- "Bacon!" Teacher- "Great! Now what does a fat cow give you?" Students- "Homework!"
Did you know Helen Keller had a dog? Neither did she. Do you know what her dogs name was? (insert Wookie noise) Do you know why her dog ran away? You would to if your name was (insert Wookie noise).
A man goes to the bar And he asks the bar tender Man: "What taste good? Tender: I usually like rum in Diet Coke. Man: how do you get a Roman in a Diet Coke? Tender: *facepalm*
I phoned my work this morning and said, "Sorry boss, I can't come in today, I have a wee cough." He said, "You have a wee cough?" I said, "Really? Cheers boss, see you next week!"
Did you gu[FLASH AD]ys read that ar[ROLLOVER FLASH AD]ticle on Wi[FLASHING FLASH AD]red on how the iPad really need[MOVING FLASH AD]s Flash?
A villainous compound of tannogallate of iron, gum-arabic and water, chiefly used to facilitate the infection of idiocy and promote intellectual crime.  The properties of ink are peculiar and contradictory:  it may be used to make reputations and unmake them; to blacken them and to make them white; but it is most generally and acceptably employed as a mortar to bind together the stones of an edifice of fame, and as a whitewash to
An implement that cries aloud for hands accustomed to the pen.  PLUNDER, v.  To take the property of another without observing the decent and customary reticences of theft.  To effect a change of ownership with the candid concomitance of a brass band.  To wrest the wealth of A from B and leave C lamenting a vanished opportunity.
The Climate of New Zealand   Teacher: Matthew, what is the climate of New Zealand?   Matthew: Very Cold, sir.   Teacher: Wrong.   Matthew: But, sir! When they send us meat it always arrives frozen!
Places I'd Rather Not Live - Paradox, New York - Crapo, Maryland - Boogertown, North Carolina - Spasticville, Kansas - Hellhole, Idaho - Purgatory, Maine - Girdletree, Maryland - Rabbithash, Kentucky
Case In Court After The Jasleen Kaur Case He argued... She argued... . . . . He shouted... She shouted... . . . . .. and then she cried...... . . . . Result: She won by Duckworth-Lewis method !!
*Texts* Can I come over bae? I need you. <3 *Gets reply text* DUDE, STOP CALLING ME THAT. I'M YOUR DEALER NOT YOUR BAE. BRING CA$H!
The temple of the god Stomach, in whose worship, with sacrificial rights, all true men engage.  From women this ancient faith commands but a stammering assent.  They sometimes minister at the altar in a half-hearted and ineffective way, but true reverence for the one deity that men really adore they know not.  If woman had a free hand in the world's marketing the race would become graminivorous.
A fragment, a decomponent part, a remain.  The word is used variously, but in the following verse on a noted female reformer who opposed bicycle-riding by women because it "led them to the devil" it is seen at its best:  The wheels go round without a sound-- The maidens hold high revel; In sinful mood, insanely gay, True spinsters spin adown the way From duty to the devil! They laugh, they sing, and--ting
The conversion of victuals into virtues.  When the process is imperfect, vices are evolved instead--a circumstance from which that wicked writer, Dr. Jeremiah Blenn, infers that the ladies are the greater sufferers from dyspepsia.
ATC: "Cessna G-ABCD What are your intentions? "  Cessna: "To get my Commercial Pilots Licence and Instrument Rating."  ATC: "I meant in the next five minutes not years."
A woman goes shopping and she buys one tomato, one steak, one yogurt, and a small bottle of soda. The cashier asks her : "you're single, aren't you?" Yes, how did you guess? Because you're ugly.
Up dawg A man sees a long lost friend he says... 'Up dawg' 'What that?' 'What's what?' 'What's up dawg?' 'Nothing much hbu' '...? Oh hahahahahaha '
A Russian boy asks his father... A Russian boy asks his father "Daddy, can I have 5 ruble to buy milk, bread, and vodka?" to which his father replies "20 ruble?! What do you need 50 ruble for?!"
A creature, variously fashioned and endowed, that formerly inhabited the meadows and forests.  It was nocturnal in its habits, and somewhat addicted to dancing and the theft of children.  The fairies are now believed by naturalists to be extinct, though a clergyman of the Church of England saw three near Colchester as lately as 1855, while passing through a park after dining with the lord of the manor.  The sight greatly staggered him, and he was so affected
M.Night Shamaylan Joke When you go to a regular movie, a friend asks you "so how good was the movie?" When you go to an M.night Shamylan movie a friend asks " So how bad was the plot twist?"
A young axe, known among Indians as a Thomashawk.  "O bury the hatchet, irascible Red, For peace is a blessing," the White Man said. The Savage concurred, and that weapon interred, With imposing rites, in the White Man's head.  John Lukkus
A vertebrate mammal holding the political views of Denis Kearney, a notorious demagogue of San Francisco, whose audiences gathered in the open spaces (sandlots) of the town.  True to the traditions of his species, this leader of the proletariat was finally bought off by his law-and-order enemies, living prosperously silent and dying impenitently rich.  But before his treason he imposed upon California a constitution that was a confection of sin in a diction of solec
Shitty one-liner: Giiirl, you can call me Saturday-Sunday, cuz I'm all you're gonna be doin' this weekend. Is this a thing? It feels like it has to have been a thing and I just forgot where.
The dentist said to his patient, "This is going to hurt a little." The patient replied, "It's ok doc, I'm ready." The dentist went on, "I've been having an affair with your wife for a while now."
What do you call a man with no arms &amp; no legs... ...hanging on the wall? Art ...floating in the sea? Bob ...laying on the floor? Matt ...down in a hole? Phil ...sitting in a pot? Stu ...
Life is terribly deficient in form. Its catastrophes happen in the wrong way and to the wrong people. There is a grotesque horror about its comedies, and its tragedies seem to culminate in farce. One is always wounded when one approaches it. Things last either too long or not long enough.
"Son, I wanted to let you know you were adopted," my dad told me. "Are you kidding? Really?" I shouted. "Yup, get ready," he said. "They'll be picking you up in about an hour."
A breaker of idols, the worshipers whereof are imperfectly gratified by the performance, and most strenuously protest that he unbuildeth but doth not reedify, that he pulleth down but pileth not up.  For the poor things would have other idols in place of those he thwacketh upon the mazzard and dispelleth.  But the iconoclast saith:  "Ye shall have none at all, for ye need them not;
First time posting here. I always found this f$%#ed up, but hilarious. Q: Why did Lucy fall off the monkey bars? A: She's got no arms Me: Knock Knock Them: Whose there? Me: Not Lucy.
What's Trump's favorite place to shop? *Wall-Mart* ^^pls ^^no ^^kill ^^I ^^came ^^up ^^with ^^this ^^at ^^2 ^^in ^^the ^^morning
A man has an accident at the factory where he works... He calls his wife and says "Meet me at the hospital! I just cut off my finger!" Wife says "The whole finger?!?" He says "No, the one next to it"
A heavy blue-gray metal much used in giving stability to light lovers--particularly to those who love not wisely but other men's wives.  Lead is also of great service as a counterpoise to an argument of such weight that it turns the scale of debate the wrong way.  An interesting fact in the chemistry of international controversy is that at the point of contact of two patriotisms lead is precipitated in great quantities.  Hail, holy Lead!--of human feuds the great And universal
What color is the wind? Son: "What color is the wind?" Mom: "The wind is the wind, it had no color. It's transparent" Dad: "The wind is blue" Mom: "Blue? How so?" Dad: "Because the wind blew"
A specialist who knows everything about something and nothing about anything else.  An old wine-bibber having been smashed in a railway collision, some wine was poured on his lips to revive him.  "Pauillac, 1873," he murmured and died.
Why does Dr. Pepper come in a bottle? Because his wife left him 4 months ago ^^^^just ^^^^searched ^^^^and ^^^^realized ^^^^this ^^^^is ^^^^heavily ^^^^overused ^^^^and ^^^^reposted ^^^^I'm ^^^^sorry
Just as it is only by contact with the art of foreign nations that the art of a country gains that individual and separate life that we call nationality, so, by curious inversion, it is only by intensifying his own personality that the critic can interpret the personality of others; and the more strongly this personality enters into the interpretation the more real the interpretation becomes, the more satisfying, the more convincing, and the more true.
The power that causes all natural phenomena not known to be caused by something else.  It is the same thing as lightning, and its famous attempt to strike Dr. Franklin is one of the most picturesque incidents in that great and good man's career.  The memory of Dr. Franklin is justly held in great reverence, particularly in France, where a waxen effigy of him was recently on exhibition, bearing the following touching account of his life and services to science:  "M
A rain of fire-and-brimstone that falls alike upon the just and such of the unjust as have not procured shelter by evicting them.  In the lines following, addressed to an Emperor in exile by Father Gassalasca Jape, the reverend poet appears to hint his sense of the imprudence of turning about to face Retribution when it is taking exercise:  What, what! Dom Pedro, you desire to go Back to Brazil to end your days in
The Holocaust Wasn't That Bad "The holocaust wasn't that bad." "Of course it was!" "I'm going to go out and kill a million Jews and one clown." "Why the clown?" "See, no one cares about the Jews."
Jokes (Water) Teacher: What is the formula for water? Student: H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O Teacher: That's not what I taught you. Student: But you said the formula for water was...H to O.
I saw my ex wife in a grocery store. "Having fun there?" I asked her, as she felt up the apples. "Does that remind you of someone?" She said, "No, but this does," Then she started rubbing the grapes.
There is no secret of life. Life's aim, if it has one, is simply to be always looking for temptations. There are not nearly enough of them; I sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a single one. It is quite dreadful. It makes one so nervous about the future.
Doc, I can't stop singing... "Doc, I can't stop singing the 'Green Green Grass of Home'." He said: "That sounds like Tom Jones syndrome." "Is it common?" I asked. He replied, "It's not unusual."
My Favorite Latvian Joke One day, hear knock on door. Man ask "Who is?" "Is potato man. I come around to give free potato." Man is very excite and opens door. Is not potato man, is secret police.
[Seance] *knock, knock* ME: Wh-who's there? [ouija board spells out A-T-C-H] ME: atch who? [spells out B-L-E-S-S-Y-O-U] ME: Dammit, Grandpa!
The other day, I was going down on my girlfriend, I said to her, "Jeez you got a big pussy. Jeez you got a big pussy." She said, "Why did you say that twice?" I said, "I didn't."
He who created the Hindoos, who are preserved by Vishnu and destroyed by Siva--a rather neater division of labor than is found among the deities of some other nations.  The Abracadabranese, for example, are created by Sin, maintained by Theft and destroyed by Folly.  The priests of Brahma, like those of Abracadabranese, are holy and learned men who are never naughty.  O Brahma, thou rare old
The other day, I was going down on my girlfriend... ...I said to her, "Jeez you got a big pussy. Jeez you got a big pussy." She said, "Why did you say that twice?" I said, "I didn't."
"You remind me of a man." - "What man?" - "The man with the power." - "What power?" - "The power of Hoodoo." - "Who do?" - "You do." - "Do what?" - "Remind me of a man."
I got my kid a puppy as a present, but it died before Christmas... FML, now I'm stuck taking care of a puppy. Edit: For those worried about the kid, it's ok. He was an adopted ginger, so no big deal.
Two Sausages are Frying in a Pan... ...And one of them says to the other, 'Fuck me, it's hot in here!', to which the other replies 'FUCK ME, *A TALKIN' SAUSAGE!!!*'
One of his principle religions is called the Christian. A sketch of it will interest you. It sets forth in detail in a book containing two million words, called the Old and New Testaments. Also it has another name -- The Word of God. For the Christian thinks every word of it was dictated by God -- the one I have been speaking of.
Barney Stinson ask god "God,why do you make woman so beautiful?" "So you'll love her" God reply. "Then why do you make them so dumb?" "So they'll love you", *Ba dum tss*
I was on a first date. "How many women have you slept with?" she asked. I said, "Do you want me to round it to the nearest ten?" "Oh, I say. Go on then." she laughed. I said, "0."
Lil Johnny: "Dad I lost my virginity las night!" Dad: "I am proud of you son, come sit next to me and tell me how it went." Lil Johnny: "I can't sit right now, my butt still hurts"
Persons of little worth found cumbering the soil of a newly discovered country.  They soon cease to cumber; they fertilize.  ABRACADABRA.  By _Abracadabra_ we signify An infinite number of things. 'Tis the answer to What? and How? and Why? And Whence? and Whither?--a word whereby The Truth (with the comfort it brings) Is open to all who grope in night,
A shoemaker's implement, named by a frowning Providence as opportunity to the maker of puns.  Ah, punster, would my lot were cast, Where the cobbler is unknown, So that I might forget his last And hear your own.  Gargo Repsky
A sect of Protestants, now extinct, who came from Europe in the beginning of the last century and were distinguished for the bitterness of their internal controversies and dissensions.  HASH, x.  There is no definition for this word--nobody knows what hash is.
A blonde gets a tattoo... On her inner thigh of a conch shell. Her friend asks "Why a conch shell, and why there of all places?" "So that when you put your ear against it, you can smell the ocean."
Suicide gone wrong [CORNY] -Hey doc, so here's the thing, I felt really bad so I tried to kill myself with painkillers. -Seriously? And what happened? -After the first two, I felt much better.
Patient: "What do you mean, 10? Doctor: "I'm sorry but you suffer from a terminal illness and have only 10 to live." Patient: "What do you mean, 10? 10 what? Months? Weeks?!" Doctor: "Nine."
POLICE! OPEN UP, WE KNOW YOU'RE IN THERE. WELL, WE DON'T KNOW BUT WE'RE KINDA HOPING YOU ARE COS IT WAS A LONG DRIVE & JIM NEEDS TO PEE.
How to catch a polar bear: Step 1: cut a hole in the ice. Step 2: set a can of peas opened and in front of it. Step 3: When the bear comes to take a pea kick it in the ice hole.
Once a man went to a resturant and ordered  an egg. When it was brought he didn't liked it so he informed the  waiter that the egg was bad. Came the reply: "I don't lay egg sir I just lay table !"
I'm not vain; I just have a healthy respect for my own mediocrity. I've been practicing humility for years, but I'm still not good enough at it to win any awards.
The doctrine, or belief, that everything is beautiful, including what is ugly, everything good, especially the bad, and everything right that is wrong.  It is held with greatest tenacity by those most accustomed to the mischance of falling into adversity, and is most acceptably expounded with the grin that apes a smile.  Being a blind faith, it is inaccessible to the light of disproof--an intellectual disorder, yielding to no treatment but death.  It is hereditary, but fortunately
So, a friend of mine claims to be really body-positive, but... ...I saw him comment on a picture of a fat woman in Wal-Mart comparing her to a pachyderm. I told him to stop being so hippo-critical.
*hires sky writer* I K N O W Y O U A T E T H E L A S T F R U I T R O L L U P. I W A N T A D I V O R C E K A R E N.
The physician's accomplice, undertaker's benefactor and grave worm's provider.  When Jove sent blessings to all men that are, And Mercury conveyed them in a jar, That friend of tricksters introduced by stealth Disease for the apothecary's health, Whose gratitude impelled him to proclaim: "My deadliest drug shall bear my patron's name!"  G.J.
My dad would always say this, I don't know if this classifies as a joke, but it's funny I'm busier than a one-legged man in an ass kicking contest Also: That smell could knock a buzzard off a shitpile
Old one but still funny: Two Muffins are sitting in an oven... ... one muffin says to the other "Damn its starting to get really hot in here." The other one says, "HOLY SHIT A TALKING MUFFIN!!!"
A mexican boy in english class... A mexican boy in english class passed a note to his friend. The teacher saw it, and screeched "WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU'RE DOING?" To which he replied, "writing an ese"
A man on his death bed: "Honey, are you here?" "Yes darling" "Ana, are you here?" "I'm here daddy" "John, are you here too?" "Of course daddy" "Then who's in the fucking shop??"
Hail noble fruit!--by Homer sung, Anacreon and Khayyam; Thy praise is ever on the tongue Of better men than I am.  The lyre in my hand has never swept, The song I cannot offer: My humbler service pray accept-- I'll help to kill the scoffer. The water-drinkers and the cranks Who load their skins with liquor-- I'll gladly bear their belly-tanks And tap them with my sticker.  Fill
WIFE: Stop spending all our money ME: Okay, fine [later] WIFE: *visibly angry* WTF? ME: *zooming by on a new Segway* RELAX KAREN, I STOLE IT
Bill gates teaching a kindergarten class "Let's count" says Gates The children start counting as he told them to. 1,2,3.x,95,98,2000,ME,XP,7,8,8.1,9,10, 10 anniversary edition
An order of monks otherwise known as black friars.  She thought it a crow, but it turn out to be A monk of St. Benedict croaking a text. "Here's one of an order of cooks," said she-- "Black friars in this world, fried black in the next."  "The Devil on Earth" (London, 1712)
I've been trying to buy a train ticket online for over an hour now. It's really pissing me off. It asks me, "Where do you want to go?" So I click on the 'Home' icon and it starts all over again.
A husband walks into the bedroom... ... and hands his wife 2 Advils. She says: "But honey, I don't have a headache!" ... To which he replies: "Aha, I got you! Let's have sex then!"
Penis Sizes A black kid comes home from his first day of school and says, "Momma, I have the biggest penis in the 3rd grade! Is it because I'm black?" The mom says, "No, nigga'! It's because your 17!"
The radius of action of the human hand.  The area within which it is possible (and customary) to gratify directly the propensity to provide.  This is a truth, as old as the hills, That life and experience teach: The poor man suffers that keenest of ills, An impediment in his reach.  G.J.
Concentration Camps (x-post from /r/Poems) Guess Who? It's a Jew Concentration camps for You! Boo Hoo! It's a Haiku F*** You. Edit: I know it's not a haiku.
Ted Nugent predicted Ted Nugent would be dead or in jail by now... which is just one more thing Ted Nugent is wrong about. (Jokes for the week of 4/13-4/19 @fridayupdate on twitter.)
"Daddy, how do you spell Budweiser?" "Uhhh....why?" "I'm drawing a picture of you for school." "Cool! It's spelled G-A-T-O-R-A-D-E."
Or any other Lie! Bro1: Why are you upset? Bro2: I text my GF but she doesn't reply back Bro1: Don't be upset bro, she may doesn't see it, or his mobile dead or she was sleeping or any other lie...
A three-legged dog walks into a saloon in the Old West A three-legged dog walks into a saloon in the Old West. He slides up to the bar and announces: ''I'm looking for the man who shot my paw.''
Tell 'em how it 'tis, not how it 'twas: Edition 2. The joke used to be "If ya lick 'er, it's quicker". Now it's: "If y'ignore 'er, ya score 'er."
How many Trump supporters does it take to change a lightbulb? THE LIGHTBULB IS FINE. THERE IS NO PROBLEM WITH IT. I MADE LIGHTBULBS WITH GOOD MANAGEMENT. LET'S MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN.
The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But women never know when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over they propose to continue it. If they were allowed their way every comedy would have a tragic ending and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art.
What do you call a?... What do you call potato who's high? A. A baked potato What do call a wizard who doesn't have enough minions? A. Short staffed Ps. This is my first post, be gentle with me.
A man went to the movie.. A man went to the movie theater's ticket window a second time and said, "One more." "For The Hobbit?" the ticket vendor asked. "No," the man replied, "That's my girlfriend."
A woman went to the bar with a black eye. "How'd ya get that?" asked the bartender. "From my husband," she replied. "But I thought he was out of town?" he asked. "So did I!" she said.
HILLARY: donald-- TRUMP: --wrong HILLARY: ...trump-- TRUMP: --wrong HILLARY: [smiling serenely] ...is good TRUMP: --wrong. nno wait. nno. no, no
Generating disagreeable emotions or sensations, as the advance of an army against its enemy.  "Were the enemy's tactics offensive?" the king asked.  "I should say so!" replied the unsuccessful general.  "The blackguard wouldn't come out of his works!"
Something written on another thing.  Inscriptions are of many kinds, but mostly memorial, intended to commemorate the fame of some illustrious person and hand down to distant ages the record of his services and virtues.  To this class of inscriptions belongs the name of John Smith, penciled on the Washington monument.  Following are examples of memorial inscriptions on tombstones:  (See EPITAPH.)  "In the sky my soul is found, And my body in the ground. By
Ran out of time At work today a coworker said to me... Coworker: I was goin to make a smoothie for breakfast but I ran out of time .   Me: You put thyme in your smoothie ?! .
two groan worthy jokes I made up over breakfast 1.Q. What do you get when you cross a Triceratops and a lemon? A. A Dino-sour 2.Q. Were do robots go to worship? A. Mech-a
"NOAH. YOU WILL BUILD AN ARK" k "NOT "K" THIS IS IMPORTANT" Sorry "THATS OK. TAKE 2 OF EVERY ANIMAL ON IT" Even fish? *THUNDER* "NO NOT FISH
[VERY RACIST-NSFW] So they get married... So a nigger and a Mexican get married, and both sets of their parents are afraid... THAT THEIR GRANDCHILDREN WILL BE TOO LAZY TO STEAL
Tim &amp; Jim went had coffee They both ordered hot coffee and after a while, Jim yelled "OMFG ! Drink fast before it cools !". Tim asked why and Jim said "Hot coffee is $10 and Cold is $50."
A bird remarkable for the catholicity of its appetite and serving to illustrate that of ours.  Among the Mahometans and Jews, the hog is not in favor as an article of diet, but is respected for the delicacy and the melody of its voice.  It is chiefly as a songster that the fowl is esteemed; the cage of him in full chorus has been known to draw tears from two persons at once.  The scientific name of this dicky-bird is _
One of two equal parts into which a thing may be divided, or considered as divided.  In the fourteenth century a heated discussion arose among theologists and philosophers as to whether Omniscience could part an object into three halves; and the pious Father Aldrovinus publicly prayed in the cathedral at Rouen that God would demonstrate the affirmative of the proposition in some signal and unmistakable way, and particularly (if it should please Him) upon the body of that hardy blasphemer, Man
To proceed sinuously and aimlessly.  The word is the ancient name of a river about one hundred and fifty miles south of Troy, which turned and twisted in the effort to get out of hearing when the Greeks and Trojans boasted of their prowess.
Dog asks cat, "We sorta look similar, have four legs and are both furry, you even are a bit smaller. Why in the hell do you have so much respect but I don't?" Cat: "You 'bow' while me 'owe'."
My lucky number is 4,000,000,000. Doesn't come in handy when you're gambling. Come on 4 billion... Fuck, 7. We need some more dice. 4 billion divided by 6, at least. -Mitch Hedberg
Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has given them an idea, whether one is serious or not. Nothing is serious except passion. The intellect is not a serious thing and never has been. It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all. The only serious form of intellect I know is the British intellect, and on the British intellect the illiterate always plays the drum.
Talking to my old man on the phone Dad: Who was that coughing in the background? Me : Oh, that was Denise. Dad: Oh, da' niece? I thought it was da' nephew. Buh dum tsssssssss
A German man and his son walk into a bar... A German man and his son walk into a bar. The man points to his son and says "Ein Bier bitte". Bartender says, "Sorry, we don't serve your Kind here".
An inscription on a tomb, showing that virtues acquired by death have a retroactive effect.  Following is a touching example:  Here lie the bones of Parson Platt, Wise, pious, humble and all that, Who showed us life as all should live it; Let that be said--and God forgive it!
Beauty is a form of genius--is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation. It is one of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark water of that silver shell we call the moon. It cannot be questioned, it has its divine right of sovereignty.
How many "friend zoned" guys does it take to change a lightbulb? How many "friend zoned" guys does it take to change a light bulb? None. They just compliment it and get mad when it won't screw.
"No one cares about the jews" "Yeah, they do" "No they don't. During the holocaust i killed 3 jews and one clown" "Why one clown?" "See? No one cares about the jews"
So a black guy walks into a bank... Approaching the nearest available teller, he says, "Hi, I'd like to file for bankruptcy." "Okay", the teller replies, "what's your name?" "Fifty Cent" badum tisss
"IT'S A BOY!" I shouted. "A BOY! I DON'T BELIEVE IT, IT'S A BOY!" And with tears streaming down my face, I swore I'd never visit another Thai Brothel...
Borrowing Money "Glad to see you, old man. Can you lend me five dollars ?" "Sorry, but I haven't a cent with me today" "And at home ?" "They're all very well, thank you, very well".
Two old drunks I was sitting in a bar with my friend and I noticed two old drunks across the bar from us. I laughed and said, "That's us in ten years." My friend replied, "That's a mirror, dipshit."
Depression of one's own spirits.  Some heaps of trash upon a vacant lot Where long the village rubbish had been shot Displayed a sign among the stuff and stumps-- "Hypochondriasis."  It meant The Dumps.  Bogul S. Purvy
*I throw u a kiss* *u duck* *it flies into space* [6 bn yrs later - the planet Xargx] LORD ZARG: Kill the- *kiss hits his cheek* LZ: Aww nvm
The art of determining the character of another by the resemblances and differences between his face and our own, which is the standard of excellence.  "There is no art," says Shakespeare, foolish man, "To read the mind's construction in the face." The physiognomists his portrait scan, And say:  "How little wisdom here we trace! He knew his face disclosed his mind and heart, So, in his own defence, denied our art."  Lavatar Shunk
Bad religious joke I created. One day Jesus is talking to god and says, "Hey dad, guess what I did today?" God: "What?" Jesus: "I walked on water." God: "No way." Jesus: "Yahweh!" Badum, tss
Boy: "Isn't the principal a dummy!" Girl: "Say, do you know who I am?" Boy: "No." Girl: "I'm the principal's daughter." Boy: "And do you know who I am?" Girl: "No," Boy: "Thank god!"
[texting] Her: We need to talk. (9:00 am) Him: About? (9:01 am) Him: What? (9:02 am) Him: WHAT??? (9:03 am) Her: Dinner tonight. (4:42 pm)
Its Valentines Day...If u r married go & kiss your wife or husband , if u have a gfbf ..do the same ..n if u r single, kiss the ground and thank GOD !! =)). HAPPY VALENTINES DAY
[Request] I need a cutesy pun related to couples/love and umbrellas/rain. Sort of like "Eiffel for you", or "never leaf me" if you know what I mean. But please nothing too long :)
Conceit is one of the greatest of the virtues, yet how few people recognise it as a thing to aim at and to strive after. In conceit many a man and woman has found salvation, yet the average person goes on all-fours grovelling after modesty.
Two native-american boys are walking through a forest One spots a bug on the ground, points to it and says to the other, "ew, squash it!" The other says, "no, i'm pretty sure it's a bug."
Bathroom Boy: Can I go to the bathroom? Teacher: Only if you can say the alphabet Boy: OK abcdefghijklmnoqrstuvwxyz Teacher: Where's the p? Boy: "Half way down my leg.
A sturdy virtue that was once found among the Pantidoodles inhabiting the lower part of the peninsula of Oque.  Some feeble attempts were made by returned missionaries to introduce it into several European countries, but it appears to have been imperfectly expounded.  An example of this faulty exposition is found in the only extant sermon of the pious Bishop Rowley, a characteristic passage from which is here given:  "Now righteousness consisteth not merely in a holy state of mind, nor yet
QA engineer walks into a bar ...(x-post from r/programmerHumor) Orders a beer. Orders 0 beers. Orders 999999999 beers. Orders a lizard. Orders -1 beers. Orders a sfdeljknesv.
A man walked into a lodge in Yellowstone  National Park. 'Can you give me a room and bath?' he asked the clerk. 'I can give you a room' the clerk said. 'But you'll have to take  the bath by yourself!'
I asked my mate what he was going to get his mum for Mothers' day. "Nothing!" he said. "Why do they get a whole day to themselves, why can't we have a Son Day?" We do mate, it comes after Saturday.
What the difference between /r/gonewild and /r/jokes? Not all the posts on /r/gonewild are about pussy, anal sex, blowjobs, and pedophilia. Seriously, /r/jokes, get your shit together
2 Scientists walk into a bar... The first one tells the bartender, "I'd like some H2O" Upon hearing that, the second scientist says, "I'd like some water too. Jimmy, we're not in the lab anymore..."
Ek sardar Kele ke chilke se fisal kar gir gya Aage phir dusre chilke se gir gya ab teesre chilke ko dekh kr k bola...?? Shit ab phir se girna padega
Mickey Mouse goes to divorce court to divorce Minnie... The Judge says "so you want to Divorce your wife because she's crazy?" Mickey replies "No, what I said was She's F&amp;#@ing Goofy."
What do you call a cow...? What do you call a cow that's missing a leg? Lean Beef. What do you call a cow with no legs? Ground Beef. What do you call a cow that's masturbating? Beef Strokin-Off
[NSFW]A more honest retelling of John F. Kennedy's famous quote on lunar exploration. "We choose to go to the moon, and Marilyn Monroe's bedroom, because it is easy and because I am hard." JFK - 1961.
Two guys are watching a dog lick its privates. One guy chuckles and says, "I wish I could do that." The other guy says, "Pet him, maybe he'll let you." An oldie, but I always liked it.
Mom: I HEARD UR SICK Me: just a cold Mom: U HAVE THE ZIKA M: no I- Mom: OH GOD IT'S ZIKA M: mom- Mom: I TRIED TO RAISE U RIGHT M: wait, what
Why do the Romans use more eggs in their omelets than the French? Because the Romans feel that when it comes to eggs, you can't have too many ovum. But in France, they believe that one egg is un ouef.
The controversial method of an opponent, distinguished from one's own by superior insincerity and fooling.  This method is that of the later Sophists, a Grecian sect of philosophers who began by teaching wisdom, prudence, science, art and, in brief, whatever men ought to know, but lost themselves in a maze of quibbles and a fog of words.  His bad opponent's "facts" he sweeps away, And drags his sophistry to light of day;
You have some up dog on your shoe!! So I was in class one day and my friend turned to me and said, "You have some up dog on your shoe" "What's up dog" was my response. "Not much bro, how about you!!!"
"You are the first woman that has ever given me an orgasm." I told the prostitute. "That's not true," she replied, "Of course it is," I laughed, "What do you mean?" She said, "I'm a man."
A weekly festival having its origin in the fact that God made the world in six days and was arrested on the seventh.  Among the Jews observance of the day was enforced by a Commandment of which this is the Christian version:  "Remember the seventh day to make thy neighbor keep it wholly."  To the Creator it seemed fit and expedient that the Sabbath should be the last day of the week, but the Early Fathers of the Church held other views.  So great is the sanct
making holy water is easy.... you boil the hell out of it but how to you turn that holy water back into regular tap water? You cook the bejesus out of it. *bejesus may be a local slang but i hope not.
The position farthest removed on either hand from the Interlocutor.  The man was perishing apace Who played the tambourine; The seal of death was on his face-- 'Twas pallid, for 'twas clean.  "This is the end," the sick man said In faint and failing tones. A moment later he was dead, And Tambourine was Bones.  Tinley Roquot   ENOUGH, pro.  All there is
Arrgh! These be some pirate jokes. Did you hear about the new pirate movie? It's rated Arrrrrgggghhhh What is a pirates favorite letter? Most think it's Arrrrgh but, it is really the Sea(c).
A weak person who yields to the temptation of denying himself a pleasure.  A total abstainer is one who abstains from everything but abstention, and especially from inactivity in the affairs of others.  Said a man to a crapulent youth:  "I thought You a total abstainer, my son." "So I am, so I am," said the scapegrace caught-- "But not, sir, a bigoted one."  G.J.
The method employed by one's opponents in baffling one's open and honorable efforts to do the right thing.  So plain the advantages of machination It constitutes a moral obligation, And honest wolves who think upon't with loathing Feel bound to don the sheep's deceptive clothing. So prospers still the diplomatic art, And Satan bows, with hand upon his heart.  R.S.K.
A man goes to the doctors... and says "I think I'm a moth" The Doctor says, "I think you need to see a psychiatrist about that". The man says, "Yeah I was on my way but I saw your light was on".
A species of tree having several varieties, of which the familiar "itching palm" (_Palma hominis_) is most widely distributed and sedulously cultivated.  This noble vegetable exudes a kind of invisible gum, which may be detected by applying to the bark a piece of gold or silver.  The metal will adhere with remarkable tenacity. The fruit of the itching palm is so bitter and unsatisfying that a considerable percentage of it is sometimes given away in what are known as "benefactions
We think you may have a phobia of marriage Doctor: We think you may have a phobia of marriage. Do you know what the symptoms are? Me: I can't say I do. Doctor: That's one of the symptoms, yes.
I must be baked Two muffins were baking in an oven. One muffin looked at the other muffin and said, "Hey man, is it getting hot in here?" And the other muffin said, "Ahhhhh! You can talk!"
How'd the monkey fall out of the tree. He was dead. How'd the next second monkey fall out of the tree? He was stapled to the first monkey! How'd the Third monkey fall out of the tree. Peer Pressure.
The fundamental element and special glory of popular literature. A thought that snores in words that smoke.  The wisdom of a million fools in the diction of a dullard.  A fossil sentiment in artificial rock.  A moral without the fable.  All that is mortal of a departed truth.  A demi-tasse of milk-and-mortality.  The Pope's-nose of a featherless peacock.  A jelly-fish withering on the shore
Pestilent bits of metal suspected of destroying civilization and enlightenment, despite their obvious agency in this incomparable dictionary.  TZETZE (or TSETSE) FLY, n.  An African insect (_Glossina morsitans_) whose bite is commonly regarded as nature's most efficacious remedy for insomnia, though some patients prefer that of the American novelist (_Mendax interminabilis_).     U
I rolled over and saw a girl laying in bed next to me. "How the fuck did you get in here?" I asked. She said, "You don't remember last night, do you?" "I do," I replied, "But my hallway is narrow."
The period during which a monarchical country is governed by a warm spot on the cushion of the throne.  The experiment of letting the spot grow cold has commonly been attended by most unhappy results from the zeal of many worthy persons to make it warm again.
HELLO? HELP! I'VE BEEN KIDNAPPED & DROPPED IN A NON-ENGLISH-SPEAKING COUNTRY & I DON'T KNOW- wait. Nm. Fell asleep at Szechuan Palace again.
Him: What? I couldn't understand you. Me: gnbkfshbffjjg H: What?! Me: GNBKFSHBFFJJG! H: Damnit Aimee! Take the burrito out of your mouth!
There were thousands of them. They were full of activities. Busy, all busy -- mainly in persecuting each other. Satan remarked -- after examining one of them through a powerful microscope: "This large beast is killing weaker animals, Divine One."
I walked up to a girl and said, "Skittles, Starburst, Jelly Babies, Haribo, Wine Gums." "Erm...what?" she asked. I said, "I'm trying to sweet-talk you into dating me."
Harambe walks into a bar... Bartender: What will you be having to drink? Harambe: I'll have a beer. Me: No, he'll have just ice. Bartender: Just ice? Me: Yes, justice for Harambe.
A man walks into a chemists "Hi, I'd like some Viagra please" asks the man. "I'm sorry" says the Pharmacist. "You can't get that over the counter." "You can if you take enough." replies the man.
Un Deux Trois A French cat called Un Deux Trois attempted to swim the English Channel last weekend but sadly didn't make it and drowned. It was all over the news the next day; "Un Duex Trois Cat Sank"
A Newfie walks into a doctor's office... And says "Doc b'y, I tinks I got dat H2N2 disease." Doctor replied "ummm...don't you mean H1N1?" Newfie says "No b'y, dis is twice as bad as dat!"
A person unacquainted with certain kinds of knowledge familiar to yourself, and having certain other kinds that you know nothing about.  Dumble was an ignoramus, Mumble was for learning famous. Mumble said one day to Dumble: "Ignorance should be more humble. Not a spark have you of knowledge That was got in any college." Dumble said to Mumble:  "Truly You're self-satisfied unduly. Of things in college I'm denied
A certain nervous disorder afflicting the young and inexperienced.  A passion that goeth before a sprawl.  When Zeal sought Gratitude for his reward He went away exclaiming:  "O my Lord!" "What do you want?" the Lord asked, bending down. "An ointment for my cracked and bleeding crown."  Jum Coople
[Dirty] Guy walks into a... A guy walks into a shop and asks if they have any parsley, the cashier answers "No sir this is a porn shop". The guy says "Oh well, do you have any dill though?"
I like my women like I like my wemoweh a wemoweh a wemoweh a wemoweh IN THE JUNGLE THE MIGHTY JUNGLE THE LION SLEEPS TONIIIIIIIIGHT
[nsfw] the ultimate trifecta of dirty joke so, i was going down on my grandma, and i started to taste donkey semen, i looked up at my dear sweet grandma and said, " jeez, grandma thats how you died?"
Gets pulled over. Cop: You know the left lane is just for passing. And you were driving in it for the past 3 miles without passing a single car. Me: Oh yeah I know, that's why we're passing the blunt.
Knock knock. "Who's there?" "Orange." "Orange who?" Knock knock. "Who's there?" "Orange." "Orange who?" Knock knock. "WHO'S THERE?" "The president." "Well, why didn't you just say so?" "I did."
An officer of the law charged with duties of the highest dignity and utmost gravity, and held in hereditary disesteem by a populace having a criminal ancestry.  In some of the American States his functions are now performed by an electrician, as in New Jersey, where executions by electricity have recently been ordered--the first instance known to this lexicographer of anybody questioning the expediency of hanging Jerseymen.
I think it's bullcrap how Miley Cyrus can get naked, lick a sledge hammer, and people call it "art" and "music". Yet when I do it, I'm "wasted" and " have to leave Home Depot".
Don't be led astray into the paths of virtue--that is the worst of women. They always want one to be good. And if we are good, when they meet us they don't love us at all. They like to find us quite irretrievably bad and to leave us quite unattractively good.
An advance agent of the reaper whose name is Indigestion.  Cold pie was highly esteemed by the remains.  Rev. Dr. Mucker  (in a funeral sermon over a British nobleman)  Cold pie is a detestable American comestible. That's why I'm done--or undone-- So far from that dear London.  (from the headstone of a British nobleman in Kalamazoo)
Patient: Doctor you must help me. I'm  under such a lot of stress I keep losing my temper with people. Doctor: Tell me about your problem. Patient: I JUST DID DIDN'T I YOU STUPID BASTARD!!!
I've got a new aardvark. Would you like to play with him? I don't really know. I've heard it growling it doesn't sound very friendly. Does it bite? That's what I want to find out.
Funny Comeback Dad: you better pass your exam or else forget me as your father! son: ..... son: sure, whatever dad. FIVE HOURS LATER Dad: so how was your exam? Son: who the hell are you?
It is the very passions about whose origin we deceive ourselves that tyrannise most strongly over us. Our weakest motives are those of whose nature we are conscious. It often happens that when we think we are experimenting on others we are really experimenting on ourselves.
The liberality of one who has much, in permitting one who has nothing to get all that he can.  A single swallow, it is said, devours ten millions of insects every year.  The supplying of these insects I take to be a signal instance of the Creator's bounty in providing for the lives of His creatures.  Henry Ward Beecher
I was watching a documentary about Islam the other day... But eventually I just got bored and changed the channel. I never did get to the bomb making part! *^OC^as ^^far ^^as ^^I ^^know*
A 7 y/o asks his mom at the dinner table... "Mom?" "Yes, honey?" "I can be whatever I want to be right?" "Yes, dear." "Then can I be a carnivore?" "...Eat your vegetables."
Satan had been making admiring remarks about certain of the Creator's sparkling industries -- remarks which, being read between the lines, were sarcasms. He had made them confidentially to his safe friends the other archangels, but they had been overheard by some ordinary angels and reported at Headquarters.
A 1-2-3 punch of cow jokes **What do you call a cow with 2 legs?** *Lean beef.* **What do you call a cow with no legs?** *Ground beef.* **What do you call a masturbating cow?** *Beef strokinoff.*
bad "it's so hot...." one-liners Two that I came up with... It's so hot that Stryper sang "To Today With the Devil" It's so hot that Karen Carpenter ate an ice cream sandwich. your turn!
Two Muffins Two muffins are being put into an oven. The one muffin turns to the other muffin and says, "Hey is it getting hot in here?" The other muffins says, "Holy shit a talking muffin!"
Presently a serpent sought them out privately, and came to them walking upright, which was the way of serpents in those days. The serpent said the forbidden fruit would store their vacant minds with knowledge. So they ate it, which was quite natural, for man is so made that he eagerly wants to know; whereas the priest, like God, whose imitator and representative he is, has made it his business from the beginning to keep him from knowing any useful thing.
Found out that girls do not like re-gifting. So, I was walking along and this girl gave me a major hard-on. However, when I tried to give it back to her, she just slapped me and ran away screaming.
Sine, cosine and ln(x) are at a party Sine approaches cosine and says, "Hey, what's ln(x) doing over in the corner by himself?". Cosine responds, "You see, ln(x) doesn't integrate very well".
What's the difference between a blue 7 and a red 4? 3, duh. (My ex's 9 year old little sister told me this joke, and followed is up with: "and YOU'RE the math guy!" &gt;_&lt; Burned.)
An enormous aquatic animal mentioned by Job.  Some suppose it to have been the whale, but that distinguished ichthyologer, Dr. Jordan, of Stanford University, maintains with considerable heat that it was a species of gigantic Tadpole (_Thaddeus Polandensis_) or Polliwig--_Maria pseudo-hirsuta_.  For an exhaustive description and history of the Tadpole consult the famous monograph of Jane Potter, _Thaddeus of Warsaw_.
A husband and a wife were at the table, having dinner. The woman drops a bit of tomato sauce on her white top. "Och, I look like a pig!" The man nods, "And you dropped tomato sauce on your top!"
Hope is a single man's game... A married man can't get none "I hope she ain't mad" she is. "I hope I get head tonight" you won't. "I hope I'm not in trouble" you are.
A man walked into a cafe in Mexico... "Hello!" he says to a squeamish waiter. "Do you have any Mexican Jews?" "Hmm... let me check in the back" the waiter replied. That's when the condom broke.
A sad dad joke A woman is at her father's deathbed. She hasn't seen him in years and now they only have a few moments left. "Dad, I'm sorry," she whispers. "Goodbye, Sorry," he says, "*I'm dead*."
-I love you! -Me too! -You too what? -What you said -What did I say? -That -Say it -What? -I want u to say it -Well -and? -what? -Say it -it
What's the difference between a Boy Scout and a Jewish person? The Boy Scout comes home from camp. ^First ^time ^posting ^on ^this ^sub ^don't ^know ^what's ^too ^offensive ^and ^what's ^not ^sorry.
An organ trafficker has a date "What do you do for a living?", asks the date. "I trade illegal organs.", the trafficker says. "Jesus! Don't you have a heart?" "Was that a critic or an order?"
One i made up for my mexican friends. If a Rabbi blesses food it's kosher. What do you call enchilada sauce bkessed by a priest? A: HOLY MOLE' Thank you, I'll be in r/dadjokes all week!
A photon checks into a hotel. The bellhop says "can I take your bags?" "No," she answers, "I'm traveling light." *(I'm new to the community, this is best I've got, I'm sorry)*
I met a pirate the other day, whose parrot was saying, "Pieces of seven! Pieces of seven!" I said, "Shouldn't that be pieces of eight?" The pirate replied, "Arrrrr, it's a parroty error."
A thimble, a battleship, a car, a wheelbarrow, a top hat, a dog, a shoe, and an iron walk into a bar... The bartender says, "I'm sorry, but we don't serve your kind here, can't be part of a Monopoly."
Lasting forever.  It is with no small diffidence that I venture to offer this brief and elementary definition, for I am not unaware of the existence of a bulky volume by a sometime Bishop of Worcester, entitled, _A Partial Definition of the Word "Everlasting," as Used in the Authorized Version of the Holy Scriptures_.  His book was once esteemed of great authority in the Anglican Church, and is still, I understand, studied with pleasure to the mind and profit of the soul
Dad joke- Car sick. I was riding in the car with my cousin and uncle. My cousin says "I think i'm getting car sick". Her dad says, "Well if you get out of the car then you'll just be sick".
Woman walks in on a man who's masturbating. Woman says, "Eww you pervert!"... **Man** walks in on a **woman** who's masturbating. Woman says "Eww you pervert!" credit: /u/nobodyatnight
It is most difficult to understand the disposition of the Bible God, it is such a confusion of contradictions; of watery instabilities and iron firmness; of goody-goody abstract morals made out of words, and concreted hell-born ones made out of acts; of fleeting kindness repented of in permanent malignities.
The latest AI personal assistant now offers unsolicited life advice. It will remind you to drink water but then question your life choices when you choose soda instead, suggesting perhaps you need a new job or hobby.
Something that is supposed to typify or stand for something else.  Many symbols are mere "survivals"--things which having no longer any utility continue to exist because we have inherited the tendency to make them; as funereal urns carved on memorial monuments.  They were once real urns holding the ashes of the dead.  We cannot stop making them, but we can give them a name that conceals our helplessness.
An old man was asking God: "God, how much time do I have until I'll die?" And God answered: "Nine." "God, is that you? What do you mean? Nine months? Nine years?" "Eight, seven, six..."
This looks like an easy word to define, but when I consider that pious and learned theologians have spent long lives in explaining it, and written libraries to explain their explanations; when I remember that nations have been divided and bloody battles caused by the difference between foreordination and predestination, and that millions of treasure have been expended in the effort to prove and disprove its compatibility with freedom of the will and the efficacy of prayer, praise, and a religious life,--recalling these awful
An egg and a sausage are frying in a pan... An egg and a sausage are frying in a pan. The egg turns to the sausage and says, "It's getting hot in here!", and the sausage replies "Wow! A talking egg!"
Unable to exist if something else exists.  Two things are incompossible when the world of being has scope enough for one of them, but not enough for both--as Walt Whitman's poetry and God's mercy to man.  Incompossibility, it will be seen, is only incompatibility let loose.  Instead of such low language as "Go heel yourself--I mean to kill you on sight," the words, "Sir, we are incompossible," would convey an equally significant intim
Two sausages are in a pan. One looks at the other and says, "Gosh, it's hot in here", and the other sausage says, "JESUS CRIST, IT'S A TALKING SAUSAGE"
So I go in for my physical... And the doctor says "I need a semen, stool, and urine sample." I say "Gee doc, I'm in a big hurry. Can I just leave my underwear?" *Taken from Bill Paxton in Predator 2.*
The part of an animal's spine that has transcended its natural limitations to set up an independent existence in a world of its own.  Excepting in its foetal state, Man is without a tail, a privation of which he attests an hereditary and uneasy consciousness by the coat-skirt of the male and the train of the female, and by a marked tendency to ornament that part of his attire where the tail should be, and indubitably once was.  This tendency
In a republic, those who exercise a supreme authority tempered by fraudulent elections.  The rabble is like the sacred Simurgh, of Arabian fable--omnipotent on condition that it do nothing.  (The word is Aristocratese, and has no exact equivalent in our tongue, but means, as nearly as may be, "soaring swine.")
Composed of words of one syllable, for literary babes who never tire of testifying their delight in the vapid compound by appropriate googoogling.  The words are commonly Saxon--that is to say, words of a barbarous people destitute of ideas and incapable of any but the most elementary sentiments and emotions.  The man who writes in Saxon Is the man to use an ax on  Judibras
When I'm on reddit When I'm drunk on reddit: "Perhaps an up vote for this fine sir, he provided intriguing content." When I'm sober on reddit: "YOU SHALL ALL BE DOWN VOTED! NO ONE SHALL BE UP VOTED!"
Mad Man Wife: How would you feel if I die? Husband: I will go mad with grief. Wife (a bit glad): You wouldn't remarry, would you? Husband: You never know. A mad man can do anything!
"A small globe I made, a time, two times and a half ago. You saw it, but did not notice it in the explosion of worlds and suns that sprayed from my hand. Man is an experiment, the other animals are another experiment. Time will show whether they were worth the trouble. The exhibition is over; you may take your leave, my lords."
Knock Knock... 1.Knock knock. Whos there? Yoda lady. Yoda lady who? Good job yodeling! 2.Knock knock. Whos there? Well, not your parents, because your parents never knock!
Did you hear the one about the old man at the doctor? Man: I can't pee, doc! Doctor: How old are you? Man: I'm 90 years old. Doctor: Oh, you've peed enough! Heard this one in a bathroom at Walmart.
God says to jesus, "You remembered it's father's day?" Jesus says "what the hell am I supposed to get a man who has everything?!" *God turns &amp; winks at camera* "Omnipresents."
It moves by squad, by company, by battalion, by regiment, by brigade, by division, by army corps; upon occasion it masses its parts and moves upon mankind with its whole strength. It is the Creator's Grand Army, and he is the Commander-in-Chief. Along its battlefront its grisly banners wave their legends in the face of the sun: Disaster, Disease, and the rest.
I asked a chinese girl for her number... I asked a Chinese girl for her number. She replied, "Sex! Sex! Sex! Free sex tonight!" I said, "Wow!" Then her friend said, "She means 6663629."
Man sees a kangaroo sitting in a movie theater "Are you a kangaroo?" asked the man, surprised. "Yes." "What are you doing at the movies?" The kangaroo replied, "Well, I liked the book."
A city boy was on his first camping trip. He was eating his lunch under a tree when an old-timer came along. 'It smells like rain' he said to the boy. The city boy replied 'They said it was lemonade.'
I found out a way to go ad - free on youtube with no adblock! Just replace the "you" in youtube with "red" in your URL and it should get rid of them, i guess they were hiding it from us or something.
I had to ground my 8yo son for this one [NSFW] Son: Dad, why do you have to wrap a bunny in duct tape? Me: I don't know son, why? Son: So it doesn't explode when you fuck it! Me:  Son: (   )
Oral exam A mother asks her son how the oral exam was. Son: "Pious." Mother: "What do you mean?" S: "The professor asks a question, I cross myself. I give him an answer, he crosses himself."
A man on crutches walks into his local Ice-Cream shop.. He asks the lady behind the desk for a Knickerbocker Glory. She says; "Crushed nuts?" He says; "No, a sprained ankle"
Strip club[OC] So I'm at the strip club and this huge breasted woman comes up to me and slaps me silly with her left titty. Guy sitting next to me says,"bet that's gonna leave a lasting mammary."
Once Law was sitting on the bench, And Mercy knelt a-weeping. "Clear out!" he cried, "disordered wench! Nor come before me creeping. Upon your knees if you appear, 'Tis plain your have no standing here."  Then Justice came.  His Honor cried: "_Your_ status?--devil seize you!" "_Amica curiae,_" she replied-- "Friend of the court, so please you." "Begone!"
Its Wrong To Have Sex Before Marriage Girl (While moaning during sex) : Its wrong. Boy : But I love you. Girl : No its wrong. Boy : I will marry you soon. Girl : You stupid cunt, the hole is wrong.
A little girl says to her Mother: Girl: Mom, I'm Bleeding. Mother: That's OK sweetie. It's just a sign you're becoming a woman. Girl: OK I was just worried about this axe in my shoulder.
Out of history of yesterday's date. Out of history made by the red Indian of America. He has duplicated God's work, and done it in the very spirit of God. In 1862 the Indians in Minnesota, having been deeply wronged and treacherously treated by the government of the United States, rose against the white settlers and massacred them; massacred all they could lay their hands upon, sparing neither age nor sex. Consider this incident:
A small crustacean very much resembling the lobster, but less indigestible.  In this small fish I take it that human wisdom is admirably figured and symbolized; for whereas the crayfish doth move only backward, and can have only retrospection, seeing naught but the perils already passed, so the wisdom of man doth not enable him to avoid the follies that beset his course, but only to apprehend their nature afterward.  Sir James Mer
[ouija board] How are you feeling? *board begins spelling* O-O-E-Y--G-O-O-E-Y What the!? A cheesy board!? G-O-U-D-A--G-U-E-S-S
Gifted with great fortitude to bear the evils afflicting another.  When Zeno was told that one of his enemies was no more he was observed to be deeply moved.  "What!" said one of his disciples, "you weep at the death of an enemy?"  "Ah, 'tis true," replied the great Stoic; "but you should see me smile at the death of a friend."
The kind of civility that urban observers ascribe to dwellers in all cities but New York.  Its commonest expression is heard in the words, "I beg your pardon," and it is not inconsistent with disregard of the rights of others.  The owner of a powder mill Was musing on a distant hill-- Something his mind foreboded-- When from the cloudless sky there fell A deviled human kidney!  Well, The man's mill had exploded. His hat he lifted
Fiction that owes no allegiance to the God of Things as They Are.  In the novel the writer's thought is tethered to probability, as a domestic horse to the hitching-post, but in romance it ranges at will over the entire region of the imagination--free, lawless, immune to bit and rein.  Your novelist is a poor creature, as Carlyle might say--a mere reporter.  He may invent his characters and plot, but he must not imagine anything taking
Originally a reptile inhabiting fire; later, an anthropomorphous immortal, but still a pyrophile.  Salamanders are now believed to be extinct, the last one of which we have an account having been seen in Carcassonne by the Abbe Belloc, who exorcised it with a bucket of holy water.
FRIENDS reunion (2016) RACHEL: [texting from bar] sry smthg came up CHANDLER: [texting from home] same... work JOEY: [in LA] wait THIS friday?
A group of IPhones walk into a bar Bartender: Get out! IPhones: Why? Bartender: I know you don't have any money! IPhones: How? Bartender: Because all you Apple products lost your Jobs years ago!
A reproduction of a work of art, by the artist that made the original.  It is so called to distinguish it from a "copy," which is made by another artist.  When the two are made with equal skill the replica is the more valuable, for it is supposed to be more beautiful than it looks.
can U answer this? If a woman is uncomfortable watching you masturbate ...Do you think: (a) You need more time together, (b) She's a prude, or (c) She should sit somewhere else on the bus?
Three logicians walk into a bar. The bartender asks, "Do you all want a beer?" The first logician says, "I don't know." The second logician says, "I don't know." The third logician says, "Yes."
A baby whale asks his father, "Dad, where did I come from?" The father replies, "Well, I put my semen into your mother's vagina, and then you were born!" "Thanks, dad." "You're whalecum."
I went to a job interview at EA The interviewer, after reading my CV, said: "I see that this CV was clearly printed on two pages, but I only have one. Where's the other one?" "Page two is 19.99$"
A mother publicly argued with his son... ...Somewhere along the lines, the mother yelled to his son: "You motherfucker!" The first thought that came to my mind was "Wow, that's a Lil TMI for me"
[NSFW] I met a girl called Michelle at a bar... Her: Hi, I am Michelle Me: I am Donaldson, but people sometimes call me Dick. Her: How do you get Dick from Donaldson? Me: You ask nicely.
A wife, or bitter half.  "Now, why is yer wife called a helpmate, Pat?" Says the priest.  "Since the time 'o yer wooin' She's niver assisted in what ye were at-- For it's naught ye are ever doin'."  "That's true of yer Riverence," Patrick replies, And no sign of contrition envinces; "But, bedad, it's a fact which the word implies
My 8-Year old patient was so pround, mom was not. Q: What type of bees make milk? A: BOO-Bees! And then he just couldn't stop laughing. Mom turned 50 shades of red and blamed dad. Good times.
The eloquence of power.  CONDOLE, v.i.  To show that bereavement is a smaller evil than sympathy.  CONFIDANT, CONFIDANTE, n.  One entrusted by A with the secrets of B, confided by _him_ to C.
[mall] Wife: Wait here. Me: Okay. Wife: Hold my purse. Me: Yes, ma'am. *looks in purse* *waves at testicles* Me: *sigh* I miss you guys!
An ancient instrument of torture.  The word is now used in a figurative sense to denote the poetic faculty, as in the following fiery lines of our great poet, Ella Wheeler Wilcox:  I sit astride Parnassus with my lyre, And pick with care the disobedient wire. That stupid shepherd lolling on his crook With deaf attention scarcely deigns to look. I bide my time, and it shall come at length, When, with
What did the retarded chef say after watching terminator PASTA LA VISTA HAHAHAAHAHAHAHHAHAAHAHHAAHHAHAHAHAHAHHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA *TAKES OFF ALL HIS CLOTHES AND RUBS HIS NIPPLES*
"IT'S A BOY" I shouted... With tears rolling down my face, I shouted out loud. "I DON'T BELIEVE IT. A BOY!" It was at that moment I decided never to visit Thailand again.
Adele called her first albums 19 &amp; 21 because they are numbers that have special importance to her life Her follow up 3.14159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510 is due out next month.
Chemistry Hotel So I was driving down the road, getting pretty tired on my way home and saw a sign that said "Chemistry Hotel" the sign said: *"Cheap Day Rates, and Even Cheaper NO3-'s"*
The thoroughly well-informed man is the modern ideal. And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a bric-a-brac shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value.
I got into an accident a few days ago. The doctor said the bleeding was all internal. I said "oh, thank god." The doctor said "why are you so happy?" I said "that's where the blood is supposed to be!"
A detachable burden easily shifted to the shoulders of God, Fate, Fortune, Luck or one's neighbor.  In the days of astrology it was customary to unload it upon a star.  Alas, things ain't what we should see If Eve had let that apple be; And many a feller which had ought To set with monarchses of thought, Or play some rosy little game With battle-chaps on fields of fame, Is downed by his unlucky star And holl
Four blonds walk into a bar... ...cheering "85 Days! 85 Days!" A gentleman inquires "Excuse me, but what's '85 days?'" The blonds reply "We completed a puzzle in 85 days and the box says 2-4 years!"
The second of two phenomena which always occur together in the same order.  The first, called a Cause, is said to generate the other--which is no more sensible than it would be for one who has never seen a dog except in the pursuit of a rabbit to declare the rabbit the cause of a dog.
Are there any 6 foot penguins round here? Asked the stranger who just pulled up wih his truck outside a bar. "No" the barkeep replied. "Well fuck," he said, "I guess I just ran over a nun..."
Tie Me Up... One day, a man came home and was greeted by his wife dressed in a very sexy nightie. "Tie me up," she purred, "and you can do anything you want." So he tied her up and went golfing.
What do you call a blind deer? No-eye-deer. What do you call a blind dead deer? Still no-eye-deer. What do you call two blind deer that died while having sex? Still no-fucking-eye-deer.
Utensils Guy 1: "Hey, did you hear that Joe got knifed the other day?" Guy 2: "That's forked up!" Guy 1: *glares at Guy 2* Guy 2: "What? Too spoon?*
The doorbell rings... A man opens the door and there's his mother-in-law on the front step. She asks, "Can I stay here for a few days?" The man says, "Sure you can." And shuts the door.
My first day in prison &amp; my giant cell-mate wants to play house. He asks me if I want to be Mama or Papa. I tell him I'll be Papa. "Ok Papa. Now get over here and suck Mama's dick."
An Ob-Gyn asks a woman to get in the stirrups and he says, "My god, you have the biggest vagina I've ever seen!" She says, "Well you didn't have to say it twice." He says, "I didn't".
How to spell "me" A man walks up to a woman and asks her to spell the word "ME" for him. She says, "M-E". The man says, "But you forgot the D!" "But there's no "D" in "ME"!" He says, "Not yet.."
What goes 99 clonk, 99 clonk, 99 clonk? A centipede with a wooden leg! *^^Joke ^^I ^^found ^^in ^^the ^^Tokyo ^^Ghoul ^^tag ^^on ^^Tumblr, ^^my ^^brother ^^loves ^^this ^^one!*
The slaying of one human being by another.  There are four kinds of homocide:  felonious, excusable, justifiable, and praiseworthy, but it makes no great difference to the person slain whether he fell by one kind or another--the classification is for advantage of the lawyers.
A guy walks into a bar and orders an Ovechkin... (Hockey joke) The bartender looks confused and asks "What the hell is an Ovechkin?" The guy says "It's a White Russian with no ice and no cup!"
So I heard that back in the day Hammurabi was actually Jewish... yea, they actually called him Hammurabbi. ^badum ^tsssssss ^^^please ^^^^don't ^^^^^hurt ^^^^^^me
Old enough -Mom I'm finally 15, can I have a boyfriend? -No. -Can I use high Heels? -No. -Can I use a mini skirt? -No. -But why? -Because you're a man, Bob.
Coworker came back into the office after being out sick for one day. Me: Feeling better? Him: Yea, I had a bad case of Ass Glaucoma. Me: What? Him: Yea! I couldn't see my ass being drug to work!
The time when men of reason go to bed.  Certain old men prefer to rise at about that time, taking a cold bath and a long walk with an empty stomach, and otherwise mortifying the flesh.  They then point with pride to these practices as the cause of their sturdy health and ripe years; the truth being that they are hearty and old, not because of their habits, but in spite of them.  The reason we find only robust persons doing this thing is that it has killed
Mullets: Business in the front. Party-at-a-mobile-home-til-5am-drinking-Pabst-then-go-home-&-get-arrested-for-domestic-violence in the back
Diff Good Girl &amp; Bad Girl What is the difference between a GOOD and a BAD girl? A GOOD girl goes to a party, goes home then goes to bed. A BAD girl goes to a party, goes to bed then goes home.
A nation in which, the thing governing and the thing governed being the same, there is only a permitted authority to enforce an optional obedience.  In a republic, the foundation of public order is the ever lessening habit of submission inherited from ancestors who, being truly governed, submitted because they had to. There are as many kinds of republics as there are graduations between the despotism whence they came and the anarchy whither they lead.
A friend asked me if I'd rather marry a mediocre woman, or my dream girl-- plus a dick. "That's easy," I said. "I don't want to settle for average. I'll take the girl with two dicks."
Did you hear about the actress who died? SO: "Did you hear about that actress who died? Reese...Reese..? Me: "Witherspoon?" SO: "No. With a knife." Me: "..." Legitimate laughter ensued.
They practiced it diligently and were filled with contentment. The Deity ordered them to practice it. They obeyed, this time. But it was just as well it was not forbidden, for they would have practiced it anyhow, if a thousand Deities had forbidden it.
I walked into a Jamaican cafe, I was hungry and a' thirstin'. I asked the barman for a tot of navy rum and a pie of some description. He said we got no rum and no pies, no rum and no pies.
A young nun is sewing a hole in a sock... ...when she pricks her finger with the needle. - Shit! - Crap, I said shit! - Damn, I said crap! - Aw, fuck it. I never wanted to become a nun, anyways.
A small square of silk or linen, used in various ignoble offices about the face and especially serviceable at funerals to conceal the lack of tears.  The handkerchief is of recent invention; our ancestors knew nothing of it and intrusted its duties to the sleeve.  Shakespeare's introducing it into the play of "Othello" is an anachronism:  Desdemona dried her nose with her skirt, as Dr. Mary Walker and other reformers have done
STOP HONKING! IF I DRIVE ANY FASTER THE TINY LIZARD THAT HITCHED A RIDE ON MY HOOD IS GONNA FALL TO HIS DEATH. HAVE SOME COMPASSION, PEOPLE.
How do you make a cat sound like a dog? Pour gasoline on it and set it on fire : WOOF! How do you make a dog sound like a cat? Freeze it and put it thru a table saw: meeeeooooow
Difference between inlaw and vultures What is the difference between in-law and vultures? - Vultures attack first, when you are dead. edit: In-law mean's ''Girlfriend/boyfriend's mother''
A fossil patriot of the early agricultural period, found in the old red soapstone underlying Kansas; characterized by an uncommon spread of ear, which some naturalists contend gave him the power of flight, though Professors Morse and Whitney, pursuing independent lines of thought, have ingeniously pointed out that had he possessed it he would have gone elsewhere.  In the picturesque speech of his period, some fragments of which have come down to us, he was known as "The Matter with Kansas."
An inhabitant of Magdala.  Popularly, a woman found out.  This definition of the word has the authority of ignorance, Mary of Magdala being another person than the penitent woman mentioned by St. Luke.  It has also the official sanction of the governments of Great Britain and the United States.  In England the word is pronounced Maudlin, whence maudlin, adjective, unpleasantly sentimental.  With their Maudlin for Magdalene
Irreconcilable differences The judge says to Mickey, "I can't grant you a divorce because you think Minnie is crazy." "I didn't say she was crazy," says Mickey, "I said she was fucking Goofy!"
"I'm proud to be a black man" "I'm proud to be a black man!" said the black man. "I'm proud to be an Asian man!" said the Asian man. "I'm proud to be a white man!" said the racist.
NATURAL DISASTERS JUST HAPPEN Nobody teaches Volcanoes to erupt, Tsunamis to devastate, Hurricanes to sway around &amp; no one teaches How to choose a Wife, NATURAL DISASTERS JUST HAPPEN.
An old black man goes to his vasectomy wearing a tuxedo... ...his doctor asks him "Why are you wearing a tuxedo?" The man responds "If I'm going to be im-po-tant, I want to look im-po-tant!"
Ain't therapy great? He yawns, but doesn't seem bored, If you think of his bill, you are poor, If you're feeling blue, and want to get screwed, "The Rapist" -it's there on his door.
Sometimes when I type my brother smashes my keyboard. But luckily it doesn't happen ofteklansiurbkjgnv hgaikuwh GI;OOR;KGHKJh klwhkjalhdhakjshdilBILWU HP KJn kjlgn
That which exists, as distinguished from that which merely seems to exist, the latter being a phenomenon.  The noumenon is a bit difficult to locate; it can be apprehended only be a process of reasoning--which is a phenomenon.  Nevertheless, the discovery and exposition of noumena offer a rich field for what Lewes calls "the endless variety and excitement of philosophic thought."  Hurrah (therefore) for the noumenon!
A bigoted lumberjack controversially said "All trees are only fit for furniture." He was accused of mahogany. ^^^^Never ^^^^saw ^^^^this ^^^^before, ^^^^does ^^^^it ^^^^make ^^^^it ^^^^OC
My 13 year old told me this joke.... Him: I want to start a dating website for Indians.... Me: a dating website for indians? [scratching my head wtf] Him: yeah I am going to call it connect the dots.
Why are bachelors thin, and married men fat? Bachelors come home, check to see what's in the fridge, and go to bed. ....Married men come home, check to see what's in the bed, and go the fridge.
Secrets from other people's wives are a necessary luxury in modern life. So, at least, I am told at the club by people who are bald enough to know better. But no man should have a secret from his own wife. She invariably finds it out. Women have a wonderful instinct about things. They discover everything except the obvious.
A favorite weapon of the assassins of character.  Sharp, irresistible by mail or shield, By guard unparried as by flight unstayed, O serviceable Rumor, let me wield Against my enemy no other blade. His be the terror of a foe unseen, His the inutile hand upon the hilt, And mine the deadly tongue, long, slender, keen, Hinting a rumor of some ancient guilt. So shall I slay the wretch without a blow, Spare
An eskimo pulls up to an intersection... with a flat tire. A Welsh guy pulls up next to him and says: "Hey, I think you've blown a seal!" To which the eskimo replies: "So what? You shag sheep."
A man is told he is drunk by a Bartender He shouted "I am not drunk" The Bartender shouted "Tell the time!" The man walked up to the clock and shouted at the Clock "I AM NOT FUCKING DRUNK"
Lady Henry Wotton was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest. She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her illusions. She tried to look picturesque but only succeeded in being untidy.
100$ Bill 1st: Why are you late? 2nd: There was a man who lost a hundred dollar bill. 1st: That's nice. Were you helping him look for it? 2nd: No, I was standing on it.
A Polar Bear walks into a bar... ... he says to the server, "Hello, I'd like some fish and chips.." The server says, "We don't serve polar bear here." The Polar Bear says, "Oh Thank God."
Q: How do you tell a brown bear from a grizzly bear? A: Climb a tree. If the bear climbs up and eats you, it's a brown bear. If the bear knocks the tree down and eats you, it's a grizzly.
Why did the chicken cross the road? Him: why did the chicken cross the road? Her: I don't know. Him: to go to the shops. Do you think that's funny? Her: No. Him: neither did the chicken.
How do you spell "laughing out loud" by using binary? 1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1o1
*kneels to pray* "Hello, God?" "YOU'VE REACHED CUSTOMER SUPPORT." "Who is this?" "MY NAME IS BRAD." "Are you in Heaven, Brad?" "NO, INDIA."
An English Girl.. WIFE: "I'm going to LONDON. What gift do you want?" HUSBAND: "An English girl." After a month, wife returns.. HUSBAND: "Where is my gift?" WIFE: "Wait for nine months!"
Mother: "Why are you home from school so early?" Son: "I was the only one who could answer a question."  Mother: "Oh really? What was the question?  Son: "Who threw the eraser at the principal?"
A familiar kitchen-garden vegetable about as large and wise as a man's head.  The cabbage is so called from Cabagius, a prince who on ascending the throne issued a decree appointing a High Council of Empire consisting of the members of his predecessor's Ministry and the cabbages in the royal garden.  When any of his Majesty's measures of state policy miscarried conspicuously it was gravely announced that several members of the High Council had been beheaded, and his murmuring
A son runs up to his dad Son: Dad, I'm gay! Dad: Son, I fucked your mother. Son: ... Dad: ... Son: What the fuck? Dad: What? I thought we were saying things that were obvious.
*full moon emerges from behimd clouds* nno--nonono it cant be...RUN. FAR AWAY FROM ME. NOW. IM A-- IM A-- *turns into bungalow* IM A WAREHOUSE
*smoke detector chirps* me*takes battery out* *chirp* me*cuts wires* *chirp* me*smashes it with a hammer* *chirp* wife:We have more than one
Woman stands on top of the bridge Ready to jump. An unwashed, disgusting hobo approaches her, saying "Hey, chick, wanna fuck?" She lookis at him with digust "No." "OK, I will just wait below."
One who, professing virtues that he does not respect secures the advantage of seeming to be what he despises.     I   I is the first letter of the alphabet, the first word of the language, the first thought of the mind, the first object of affection.  In grammar it is a pronoun of the first person and singular number.  Its plural is said to be _We_, but how there can be more than one myself is doubtless clearer to the
Little Johnny (x-post /r/AntiJokes) The Mailman saw Little Johnny on the side of the street with an old coffee can. Mailman: What have you got in that can there? Johnny: dogshit Mailman: what the fuck
I was in a highbrow bar at the Ritz Carlton, and their Pianist was asking folks for requests. I said to him, "Can you play an Etude by Chopin?" He replied, "Which one?" I responded, "The composer."
So a beautiful girl I met was coming to my house.. But I was afraid of getting a boner, so I taped my dick to my leg. She shows up in a mini-skirt, smoking hot.. so I kicked her in the face.
A guy I know calls women's periods "shark week." I asked him why, and he told me "Beware of blood in the water. The fearsome beast will bite your head clean off, unprovoked, when you least expect it."
To apply for the new 'Permission to Exist' certificate, you first need to fill out Form 1098-X in triplicate, get it notarized, then wait 4-6 weeks for the 'Form to Apply for the Application Form', which you must submit before noon on a day that ends in 'y'.
An atmospheric demonstration once very common but now generally abandoned for the tornado and cyclone.  The hurricane is still in popular use in the West Indies and is preferred by certain old-fashioned sea-captains.  It is also used in the construction of the upper decks of steamboats, but generally speaking, the hurricane's usefulness has outlasted it.
[restaurant] WAITER: And to drink? ME: I'll have a coke and a pepsi. WAITER: Is pep...um...Is cok...ok...Is...I...what.. *waiter spontaneously combusts*
Jewish guy goes to his rabbi . . . . . . he asks, "I don't get it. If we're the chosen people, why did God make the goys?" The rabbi shrugs and say, "Hey . . . somebody's gotta pay retail."
Chuck Norris isn't real... If he had been real, he would've come here and probably smash my head on my keyboarjfjcjcndndjxucbfjdi oejebhh jdudyehsbsj
Jealousy. Do not forget it, keep it in mind. It is the key. With it you will come to partly understand God as we go along; without it nobody can understand him. As I have said, he has openly held up this treasonous key himself, for all to see. He says, naïvely, outspokenly, and without suggestion of embarrassment: "I the Lord thy God am a jealous God."
A man who occupies the lowest rung of the military ladder.  Fiercely the battle raged and, sad to tell, Our corporal heroically fell! Fame from her height looked down upon the brawl And said:  "He hadn't very far to fall."  Giacomo Smith
You can't hear me! She: "You are so deaf. You never hear me." He: "I heard you. I was just looking at my new watch." She: "Oh yeah? What kind is it?" He: Six o'clock!"
She:Hey,Whats up? Me:Onion prices. S:You know what I mean,like What's crackin'? M:Nutshells. S:Really?Fine.What's poppin? M:Corn. *Blocked*
(Literally, seafoam, and by many erroneously supposed to be made of it.)  A fine white clay, which for convenience in coloring it brown is made into tobacco pipes and smoked by the workmen engaged in that industry.  The purpose of coloring it has not been disclosed by the manufacturers.  There was a youth (you've heard before, This woeful tale, may be), Who bought a meerschaum pipe and swore That color it would he!  He
3 guys just arrived to heaven and... 3 guys just arrived to heaven and then Jesus proceeds to call by their names: - "Rand" kiss my hand! - "Pete" kiss my feet! Then Jesus: Rick!? Why are you running?
I was on a flight the other day when the air hostess came up to me and said... "Excuse me sir, would you like to have dinner?" I said, "What are the options?" She said, "Yes and No."
Some guy just read the funniest joke he's read all week, and then down-voted it. This joke is about him. What do you call an internet addict full of negativity? You don't. No one calls him. Ever.
"I'm great," the Lion said--"I reign The monarch of the wood and plain!"  The Elephant replied:  "I'm great-- No quadruped can match my weight!"  "I'm great--no animal has half So long a neck!" said the Giraffe.  "I'm great," the Kangaroo said--"see My femoral muscularity!"  The 'Possum said:  "I'm great--behold, My tail is lit
An habiliment of the stage designed to reinforce the general acclamation of the press agent with a particular publicity. Public attention was once somewhat diverted from this garment to Miss Lillian Russell's refusal to wear it, and many were the conjectures as to her motive, the guess of Miss Pauline Hall showing a high order of ingenuity and sustained reflection.  It was Miss Hall's belief that nature had not endowed Miss Russell with beautiful legs.  This theory was impossible of acceptance by the male
Hey Dad did anybody call for me when I was out? "Yeah some girl named Jenny" "Jenny who?" "I don't know. Why don't you call her and ask." "She leave a number?" "Yeah 867-5309"
In theology, the state of a luckless mortal prenatally damned.  The doctrine of reprobation was taught by Calvin, whose joy in it was somewhat marred by the sad sincerity of his conviction that although some are foredoomed to perdition, others are predestined to salvation.
[Pun] There's something about the sky... There was a man in an airplane and he had just over dosed on alcohol, one could say he really was HIGH -&lt;&gt;~&lt;&gt;- ^those are what I call 'pun glasses'
Epic Tragedy Boy: *calls 911* Hello? I need your help! 911: Alright, What is it? Boy: Two girls are fighting over me! 911: So what's your emergency? Boy: The ugly one is winning.
I noticed you just hit the snooze alarm. MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOWWWWW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW MEOW
A woman is at her father's deathbed. She hasn't seen him in years and now they only have a few moments left. "Dad, I'm sorry," she whispers. "Goodbye, Sorry," he says, "*I'm dead.*"
CAT VAMPIRE: let me in! ME: ok CAT VAMPIRE: you fool! now I will suck your bl- ME: *closes door* CAT VAMPIRE: ... CAT VAMPIRE: let me out
A thing which takes the liberty to differ from other things of its class, as an honest man, a truthful woman, etc.  "The exception proves the rule" is an expression constantly upon the lips of the ignorant, who parrot it from one another with never a thought of its absurdity.  In the Latin, "_Exceptio probat regulam_" means that the exception _tests_ the rule, puts it to the proof, not _confirms_ it.  The mal
Give me your best 'Yo Momma' jokes. Yo momma's so fat, she wears a watch on each arm for different timezones! Yo momma's so fat, she is on BOTH sides of the family! EDIT: Grammar...
Unlike a menagerie lion.  Leonine verses are those in which a word in the middle of a line rhymes with a word at the end, as in this famous passage from Bella Peeler Silcox:  The electric light invades the dunnest deep of Hades. Cries Pluto, 'twixt his snores:  "O tempora! O mores!"  It should be explained that Mrs. Silcox does not undertake to teach pronunciation of the Greek and Latin
The rudimentary organ of an elephant which serves him in place of the knife-and-fork that Evolution has as yet denied him. For purposes of humor it is popularly called a trunk.  Asked how he knew that an elephant was going on a journey, the illustrious Jo. Miller cast a reproachful look upon his tormentor, and answered, absently:  "When it is ajar," and threw himself from a high promontory into the sea.  Thus perished in his
A person of low taste, more interested in himself than in me.  Megaceph, chosen to serve the State In the halls of legislative debate, One day with all his credentials came To the capitol's door and announced his name. The doorkeeper looked, with a comical twist Of the face, at the eminent egotist, And said:  "Go away, for we settle here All manner of questions, knotty and queer, And we cannot have, when the speaker
Two friends: - I heard that you have founded a musical band. - Yes it is a quartet. - How many are you? - We are three. - Three? - Me and my brother. - You have a brother? - No why do you ask?
A woman noticed her husband standing on the bathroom scale, sucking in his stomach. "Ha! That's not going to help," she said. "Sure, it does," he said. "It's the only way I can see the numbers."
Recently a fellow coin maker challenged me to beat his best work. (x-post /r/3amjokes) When I punched his daughter's face, he said "That's not what I mint." At least his daughter was impressed.
During twenty-three days in every month (in absence of pregnancy) from the time a woman is seven years old till she dies of old age, she is ready for action, and competent. As competent as the candlestick is to receive the candle. Competent every day, competent every night. Also she wants that candle -- yearns for it, longs for it, hankers after it, as commanded by the law of God in her heart.
"Guess my nationality" the old man said Deducing from the man's accent that he was Briish, the other man said so. "You're correct, but where's the t?" asked the man. "In the harbor"
When god created Adam, she said: "I've got good news and bad news.... ...good news is, I'm giving you a penis AND a brain. Bad news is, I'm only giving you enough blood to use one at a time."
A sufficient number of members of a deliberative body to have their own way and their own way of having it.  In the United States Senate a quorum consists of the chairman of the Committee on Finance and a messenger from the White House; in the House of Representatives, of the Speaker and the devil.
As we stripped off jumping into the bed I said to my boyfriend, "Can you give me a minute?" "Why? Want to freshen up?" He asked. "No," I replied. "Its just that last time you only gave me 30 seconds."
Reddit, I am a huge fan of corny jokes. The punnier the better. Gimme your best shot. I'll give you one of my favorites: What does a tree do when it goes on vacation? It packs its trunk and leaves.
An immaterial but visible being that inhabited the air when the air was an element and before it was fatally polluted with factory smoke, sewer gas and similar products of civilization.  Sylphs were allied to gnomes, nymphs and salamanders, which dwelt, respectively, in earth, water and fire, all now insalubrious.  Sylphs, like fowls of the air, were male and female, to no purpose, apparently, for if they had
A man goes to visit the doctor Man: Did the test results come back? Doc: Yes, and the prognosis isn't good. Man: Well how long do I have? Doc: About 10. Man: 10 what? Years? Months? Doc: 8... 7....
Plato suggested that we live in a world of mere shadows, but if you've ever tried to understand the tax code, you'd swear we're in a cave full of shadows, echoes, and an endless loop of bureaucratic forms.
A lady says to the psychiatrist, "I think I might be a nymphomaniac." He says, "I'll see what I can do to help you. My fee  is eighty dollars an hour." She says, "How much for all night?"
Three old guys are out walking... Three old guys are out walking. First one says, 'Windy, isn't it?' Second one says, 'No, it's Thursday!' Third one says, 'So am I. Let's go get a beer..'
hello, hello ! 911 ? 911 ? Yes, Sir, what happened ? "I think my wife's dead". "What happened, Sir ?" "Well...she's lying in bed, cold and stiff as usual, but the dishes haven't been done in 3 days !"
Son: Dad, what does 'gay' means?... Father: It means 'to be happy'. &amp;nbsp; Son: Are you gay? &amp;nbsp; Father: No, son. I have a wife.
It is as I tell you. He equips the Creator with every trait that goes to the making of a fiend, and then arrives at the conclusion that a fiend and a father are the same thing! Yet he would deny that a malevolent lunatic and a Sunday school superintendent are essentially the same. What do you think of the human mind? I mean, in case you think there is a human mind.
"Do you love me, Mulla?" whispered the girl. "Of course I do," Mulla Nasrudin whispered back. "Will you marry me then?" she asked. "Let's not change the subject?" said Nasrudin.
Finding out a gay guy has a crush on you is like finding 1,000,000 pesos. You'll think "Well, I can't do much with this right now, but if I ever cross that line I'll be just fine"
The Funniest Joke I Ever Heard Was... Post them in here. Honestly, off the top of your head, post the funniest joke you've ever heard. Whether it's very long, or a simple one-liner, share it!
The instrument and symbol of a freeman's power to make a fool of himself and a wreck of his country.     W   W (double U) has, of all the letters in our alphabet, the only cumbrous name, the names of the others being monosyllabic.  This advantage of the Roman alphabet over the Grecian is the more valued after audibly spelling out some simple Greek word, like _epixoriambikos_.
A man asks, "God, why did you make woman so beautiful?" God responded, "So you would love her." The man asks, "But God, why did you make her so dumb?" God replied, "So she would love you."
M-I can't go. My Ewok is sick. H-Gigi that's a stuffed animal. M- H- M-Crap. I think you're right. I bet he ate all my Doritos again.
A man enters his house with a duck under his arm and says "See, this is the pig I've been screwing". "What do you mean? That's not a pig." his wife replies. "I wasn't talking to you".
A young person of the unfair sex addicted to clewless conduct and views that madden to crime.  The genus has a wide geographical distribution, being found wherever sought and deplored wherever found.  The maiden is not altogether unpleasing to the eye, nor (without her piano and her views) insupportable to the ear, though in respect to comeliness distinctly inferior to the rainbow, and, with regard to the part of her that is audible, bleaten out of
Why did the chicken cross the road? To get to the other side. ^^^Get ^^^it? ^^^To ^^^get ^^^to ^^^"the ^^^other ^^^side"? ^^^She ^^^was ^^^trying ^^^to ^^^kill ^^^herself.
The dent "I noticed you've got a dent on your car?" "Yeah." "Oh. Did you drink too much last evening?" "Yes, I did." "I see. So your wife had to drive you home?" "Exactly."
A man and his zebra There lives a man and his zebra Jose. Jose is hard of sight. Every morning, just at dawn, the man takes out Jose and askes him "Jose, can you see by the dawn's early light?"
*sees guy ordering pizza* "With onion" (Ok) "Sausage" (Nice) "Mushroom" (Hell yea) "Chk" (Plz) "Meatballs" (Why) "Anchovies" (Ur dead to me)
Knock knock *knock knock* "who's there?" *knock knock* "who's there?" *knock knock* "who's there?" *knock knock* "Quick! Open the coffin I don't think he's dead!"
An ancient religious symbol erroneously supposed to owe its significance to the most solemn event in the history of Christianity, but really antedating it by thousands of years.  By many it has been believed to be identical with the _crux ansata_ of the ancient phallic worship, but it has been traced even beyond all that we know of that, to the rites of primitive peoples.  We have to-day the White Cross as a symbol of chastity, and the Red Cross as
BIRDMAN Little girl: "Why does your son say, 'Cluck, cluck, cluck?'" Mother: "Because he thinks he's a chicken." Little girl: "Why don't you tell him he's not a chicken?" Mother: "We need the eggs."
The lake by which the ancients entered the infernal regions.  The fact that access to the infernal regions was obtained by a lake is believed by the learned Marcus Ansello Scrutator to have suggested the Christian rite of baptism by immersion.  This, however, has been shown by Lactantius to be an error.  _Facilis descensus Averni,_ The poet remarks; and the sense Of it is that when down-hill I turn I
Two babys at the birth ward... ...one baby says to the other."i'm a boy" to with the other reply:"how do you know?". the first baby pulls the blanket to the side and says:"look i got blue socks on"
KILLER PJ for Indians! James Bond was travelling in an Autorickshaw Driver - Rs.7.50 hue Sahab .. Bond - Yeh lo 5 rupaye .. Driver - Lekin baki ke 2.50 ?! Bond - " DHAI ANOTHER DAY " :D :D
A Polish guy goes for eye test. Doctor points towards the last line on Eye Test Chart, S I S Z T R Z T O W S K I Doctor, "Can you read that?" Polish guy, " Read that? I fucking know that guy!!!"
A machine of great moral value to man, allaying his concern for the future by reminding him what a lot of time remains to him.  A busy man complained one day: "I get no time!"  "What's that you say?" Cried out his friend, a lazy quiz; "You have, sir, all the time there is. There's plenty, too, and don't you doubt it-- We're never for an hour without it."  Purzil Crofe
New Game Here's a new game we can all play! You have to use a long mallet to hit frozen potato treats through hoops on a field. All while dressed as a frontiersman I call it Croquette Crockett Croquet
If your name is Susan, I surmise you're lazy. If your name is Tom, I posit you're a peeper. If your name is Jason, I automatically assume... YOU'RE A CUNT!!! NO! SERIOUSLY, FUCK YOU, JASON!!!
What's the difference between a hooker, a lover and a housewife? A hooker says "Faster! faster!" A lover says "Slower....slooower..." A housewife says "Beige. I think I'll paint the ceiling beige."
Mona Lisa 1o acto:Una mona aplastada. 2o acto: La misma mona aplastada. 3o acto: La misma mona aplastada. Como se llama la obra? "La Mona Lisa."
Heard a good joke from a patient today. (Xpost from /r/nursing) Two inmates standing around. One lets out a loud fart and the other says, "Hey, that sounds about my size." Had to share...
Two quick jokes How do you make a dog go meow? Freeze it in a block of ice an run it through a band-saw... MMMEEEOOOOWWWW! How do you make a cat go woof? Pour kerosene on it an drop a match... WOOOFF!
So two guns are hanging out, "shootin' the shit"... When one gun says to the other, "Damn dude, those are some nice bullets, where'd you get them?" the second gun says, "In some old magazine I found."
The extreme outpost of the face.  From the circumstance that great conquerors have great noses, Getius, whose writings antedate the age of humor, calls the nose the organ of quell.  It has been observed that one's nose is never so happy as when thrust into the affairs of others, from which some physiologists have drawn the inference that the nose is devoid of the sense of smell.  There's a man with a Nose, And wherever he goes The people run from
A couple is in bed, smoking after sex. He: - According to what I saw and I felt tonight, I'm not the first. She: - Of course not, and according to what I felt, you're not even the last.
A short, sharp saying in prose or verse, frequently characterized by acidity or acerbity and sometimes by wisdom. Following are some of the more notable epigrams of the learned and ingenious Dr. Jamrach Holobom:  We know better the needs of ourselves than of others.  To serve oneself is economy of administration.  In each human heart are a tiger, a pig, an ass and a nightingale.  Diversity of character is due to their unequal activity.
What is matthew mcconaughey' least favorite part of interstellar? "The girls get older, but he stays the same age" -first attempt at a original joke (apologies if its a repost that I'm unaware of)
On November 9th... Me: "I guess President Hillary Clinton is with VP Tim Kaine now. And both feeling pretty high. You could say she's ....co-Kaine! Hahah!" Wife: "Trump won." Me: "Shit..."
Refined, after the fashion of a gent.  Observe with care, my son, the distinction I reveal: A gentleman is gentle and a gent genteel. Heed not the definitions your "Unabridged" presents, For dictionary makers are generally gents.  G.J.
"WATERMELON" HAS 4 SYLLABLES. "ILLUMINATI" HAS 5 SYLLABLES. THAT'S PRETTY CLOSE. WATERMELON IS ILLUMINATI.
There are sins whose fascination is more in the memory than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratify the pride more than the passions and give to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than they bring or can ever bring to the senses.
Do you believe in love at first site? A boy asked a girl: "Do you believe in love at first site?". The Girl replied, "No". The boy phewed and said: "We should meet again then". Ultimate Thug Life.
Great Insults A letter from teacher to parent:Dear parent,Kamal doesn't smel nice in class.Please try to bathe him.Parent answer:Dear teacher,Kamal is not a rose.Don't smell him.Teach him.
Six year old just gave me these gems What do you call a dog with a stain on his fur? Spot. What do you call a dog who lays on a golf course? Ruff. What do you call a dog who just got run over? Rhody.
Sardar sent SMS to his BOSS: "Me sick, no work" Boss SMS back: "When I am sick I kiss my wife try it" 2 hours later sardar sms 2 boss: "Me ok, ur wife very sweet"
I decided to take an aerobics class. I bent... twisted... gyrated... jumped up and down... and perspired for a half an  hour. But by thetime I got my tights on.... the class was over!
A Test WC in college. Three cubicles. Voice from the left: *Peter, professor passed you in philosophy?* Voice from the right: *No, he did not...* Voice from the middle: **And I won't!**
What did the horse say to the group of kids. Haaaaay you guuuysss Hahahah hope youvliked it worked pretty darn hard.comon up woth thisnfunny joke, cya hahahahha lol
A Mother is cleaning her kids room... She finds a bunch of BDSM gear and fetish mags. She shows her husband Mom: What do we do? Dad: I'm not sure, but whatever you do you better not spank him!!
Independent, irresponsible.  An absolute monarchy is one in which the sovereign does as he pleases so long as he pleases the assassins.  Not many absolute monarchies are left, most of them having been replaced by limited monarchies, where the sovereign's power for evil (and for good) is greatly curtailed, and by republics, which are governed by chance.
A disease which the patient and his friends frequently mistake for deep religious conviction and concern for the salvation of mankind.  As the simple Red Man of the western wild put it, with, it must be confessed, a certain force:  "Plenty well, no pray; big bellyache, heap God."
A receptacle for such sacred objects as pieces of the true cross, short-ribs of the saints, the ears of Balaam's ass, the lung of the cock that called Peter to repentance and so forth. Reliquaries are commonly of metal, and provided with a lock to prevent the contents from coming out and performing miracles at unseasonable times.  A feather from the wing of the Angel of the Annunciation once escaped during a sermon in Saint Peter's and so tickled
The mother of caution.  "My accountability, bear in mind," Said the Grand Vizier:  "Yes, yes," Said the Shah:  "I do--'tis the only kind Of ability you possess."  Joram Tate
In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his neighbour. In fact, to be a bit better than one's neighbour was considered excessively vulgar and middle class. Nowadays, with our modern mania for morality, everyone has to pose as a paragon of purity, incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues. And what is the result? You all go over like ninepins--one after the other.
What sucks about being black and jewish? You gotta stand at the back of the oven! Edit: I was at an [7] when typing this and fucked it up. It is better now. oven was bus. Changed bus to oven.
Legitimate authority to be, to do or to have; as the right to be a king, the right to do one's neighbor, the right to have measles, and the like.  The first of these rights was once universally believed to be derived directly from the will of God; and this is still sometimes affirmed _in partibus infidelium_ outside the enlightened realms of Democracy; as the well known lines of Sir Abednego Bink, following:  By what right,
Awful Knock Knock Joke Knock Knock Who's there? Didgerid Didgerid who? bzanweaaaangggglllllddeeeeeoooooowwwwwaaaaannnn.... In my opinion, the lamer the knock knock joke, the better.
I love my wife My wife told me that she wanted to give me a deepthroat blowjob today. "Really!" I exclaimed. "No," She said, "April Foogargagggrraggggle." That'll teach her to try and be funny...
The patriotism of a Scotchman.     J   J is a consonant in English, but some nations use it as a vowel-- than which nothing could be more absurd.  Its original form, which has been but slightly modified, was that of the tail of a subdued dog, and it was not a letter but a character, standing for a Latin verb, _jacere_, "to throw," because when a stone is thrown at a dog the dog's tail
C-3PO Papa, when C-3PO is naked, he is see-through PO (My 5 1/2 y/o just came up with this. I think it's funny, for a 5 y/o :-))
*on a 1st date* Her:..and I have 3 cats Me: Swipe left H: Did you say "swipe left"?! M: H: M: *panicked whisper* swipeleftswipeleftswipeleft
We've got an aviary at home... We've got an aviary at home, but one of our birds of prey will only exercise at night to the sounds of '80s synth pop. Our kestrel manoeuvres in the dark.
I saw my neighbour jogging at 1am this morning and said "It's a bit late for you Kathy, isn't it ?". She said "I couldn't sleep". I said "That's not what I meant, you fat b*tch"....
Q: What do you call a deer with no eyes? A: No eye deer (No idea) Q: What do you call a quadriplegic deer with no eyes? A: Still, no eye deer. (Still no idea)
Once a warrior gentle of birth, Then a person of civic worth, Now a fellow to move our mirth. Warrior, person, and fellow--no more: We must knight our dogs to get any lower. Brave Knights Kennelers then shall be, Noble Knights of the Golden Flea, Knights of the Order of St. Steboy, Knights of St. Gorge and Sir Knights Jawy. God speed the day when this knighting fad Shall go to the dogs and the
A degree of distinction between notoriety and fame--a little more supportable than the one and a little more intolerable than the other.  Sometimes it is conferred by an unfriendly and inconsiderate hand.  I touched the harp in every key, But found no heeding ear; And then Ithuriel touched me With a revealing spear.  Not all my genius, great as 'tis, Could urge me out of night. I felt the faint appulse of his, And leapt
Grammar joke I told my girlfriend "sweetie, I want you beside me, in front of me,behind me, on top of me, under me, and to the left and right of me" she said "Honey, are you prepositioning me?"
One associated with another in a crime, having guilty knowledge and complicity, as an attorney who defends a criminal, knowing him guilty.  This view of the attorney's position in the matter has not hitherto commanded the assent of attorneys, no one having offered them a fee for assenting.
A file provided for the teeth of the rats of reform.  The number of plans for its abolition equals that of the reformers who suffer from it, plus that of the philosophers who know nothing about it.  Its victims are distinguished by possession of all the virtues and by their faith in leaders seeking to conduct them into a prosperity where they believe these to be unknown.  PRAY, v.  To ask that the laws of the universe be annulled in behalf of a single petitioner confessed
The 'C word' My girlfriend hates it when I say the "C word". This one time, we were watching Spongebob and I'm like "hey, its 'C word'!" and shes like "it's Squidward, you cunt"
"I'm very sorry, but you will die soon", said the doctor "How soon?", the frail man asked, his body trembling at every word. "In ten." "Ten what? Ten years? Ten-" "Nine." "Eight."
A man walks into a bar.... ...sits down, orders a beer, and begins to gaze longingly at the barmaid. The barmaid hands him the beer, returns the stare and says... "Take a pitcher, it'll last longer."
I said to my doctor... I said to my doctor, "Doctor, i just don't know what's wrong with me this week?" He said "Jim, you're a hypochondriac". I replied "Oh no, not that aswell!"
The singular of "dice."  We seldom hear the word, because there is a prohibitory proverb, "Never say die."  At long intervals, however, some one says:  "The die is cast," which is not true, for it is cut.  The word is found in an immortal couplet by that eminent poet and domestic economist, Senator Depew:  A cube of cheese no larger than a die May bait the trap to catch a nibbling mie.
*phone rings* Yoda: Yoda Luke: WTF VADER'S MY DAD? Y: Uh L: And you knew & told me to kill him? Y: L: Y: Going thru a tunnel I am *hangs up*
I was sitting on the toilet, constipated... The undropped turd asked me, "Man, what did you eat?!" "A pound of cheese," I said. The turd said, "You're shittin' me." I said, "I shit you not."
Having a strong sense of one's own merit, coupled with a feeble conception of worth in others.  There was once a man in Ispahan Ever and ever so long ago, And he had a head, the phrenologists said, That fitted him for a show.  For his modesty's bump was so large a lump (Nature, they said, had taken a freak) That its summit stood far above the wood Of his hair, like a mountain peak.  So modest a man
An instrument to tickle human ears by friction of a horse's tail on the entrails of a cat.  To Rome said Nero:  "If to smoke you turn I shall not cease to fiddle while you burn." To Nero Rome replied:  "Pray do your worst, 'Tis my excuse that you were fiddling first."  Orm Pludge
My friend told me that she wanted to give me a deep throat blow job today. "Really!?" I asked. "No," she replied, "April Fogarbnsrgabsjg...." That'll teach her to try to be funny...
Little Susie goes to the doctor... Little Susie goes to the doctor. Doctor puts a stethoscope on her back and says, "Ok now, big breathes." Susie says, "I know! And I'm only 12!"
An infraction of the law having less dignity than a felony and constituting no claim to admittance into the best criminal society.  By misdemeanors he essays to climb Into the aristocracy of crime. O, woe was him!--with manner chill and grand "Captains of industry" refused his hand, "Kings of finance" denied him recognition And "railway magnates" jeered his low condition. He robbed a bank to make himself respected. They still rebuffed him, for
DEMON: [roars] KNEEL, MORTALIT IS I, BAELROTH THE SPOON-HIDER ME: omg what're u gonna do to me? DEMON: werewere you not listening just now
My favourite joke at the moment... How do you get an elephant in to a plastic bag? First you take the 'T' out of 'Tesco', what do you get? Esco. Then you take the 'F' out of 'Weigh', what do you get?
2. So I said to the shoe salesman... - I'm looking for a pair of basketball shoes... Shoe salesman - ajkdkdkaldnrmsldkd - what? Shoe salesman - sorry, I was struggling to converse.
Worst Joke Ever Two whales are sitting in a bar and one whale says "eeeyyoooo eeeeyyy yyeeooo oooyyy ooeeeee" and the other whale says "Shut up Steve, you're drunk."
A part of the earth's surface, considered as property.  The theory that land is property subject to private ownership and control is the foundation of modern society, and is eminently worthy of the superstructure.  Carried to its logical conclusion, it means that some have the right to prevent others from living; for the right to own implies the right exclusively to occupy; and in fact laws of trespass are enacted wherever property in land is recognized.  It follows that if the whole area of _
I just bought bunk beds. The other night I brought a date home. She said, "I'll get on top." I said, "Great, I'll get the ladder." She said, "You sure think a lot of yourself, don't you?"
Even in actual life egotism is not without its attractions. When people talk to us about others they are usually dull. When they talk to us about themselves they are nearly always interesting, and if one could shut them up when they become wearisome as easily as one can shut up a book of which one has grown wearied they would be perfect absolutely.
My wife called me a child. I told her, be careful who you're calling a child because if I'm a child, that makes you a pedophile. And I'll be damned if I'm gonna sit here and get lectured by a pervert.
A person who combines the judicial functions of Minos, Rhadamanthus and Aeacus, but is placable with an obolus; a severely virtuous censor, but so charitable withal that he tolerates the virtues of others and the vices of himself; who flings about him the splintering lightning and sturdy thunders of admonition till he resembles a bunch of firecrackers petulantly uttering his mind at the tail of a dog; then straightway murmurs a
One who approaches Greatness on his belly so that he may not be commanded to turn and be kicked.  He is sometimes an editor.  As the lean leech, its victim found, is pleased To fix itself upon a part diseased Till, its black hide distended with bad blood, It drops to die of surfeit in the mud, So the base sycophant with joy descries His neighbor's weak spot and his mouth applies, Gorges and prospers
The Id, The Ego, and The Super Ego walk into a bar.... The Id, The Ego, and The Super Ego walk into a bar. No they didn't! Yes, they did! None of this even matters!
The two Testaments are interesting, each in its own way. The Old one gives us a picture of these people's Deity as he was before he got religion, the other one gives us a picture of him as he appeared afterward. The Old Testament is interested mainly in blood and sensuality. The New one in Salvation. Salvation by fire.
A narrative, commonly untrue.  The truth of the stories here following has, however, not been successfully impeached.  One evening Mr. Rudolph Block, of New York, found himself seated at dinner alongside Mr. Percival Pollard, the distinguished critic.  "Mr. Pollard," said he, "my book, _The Biography of a Dead Cow_, is published anonymously, but you can hardly be ignorant of its authorship.  Yet in reviewing it you speak
Two corn muffins were in the oven baking. One turns to the other and says "man it's HOT in here" the other corn muffin replies... AAAAHAHHHAHAHAHHaaaaa A TALKING CORN MUFFIN!!!!!!!
Amish jokes Have you heard about the promiscuous Amish lady? She had two Mennonite I had the Amish flu last week. At first I got a little horse. Then I got a little buggy... but yesterday I got butter
The science of the earth's crust--to which, doubtless, will be added that of its interior whenever a man shall come up garrulous out of a well.  The geological formations of the globe already noted are catalogued thus:  The Primary, or lower one, consists of rocks, bones or mired mules, gas-pipes, miners' tools, antique statues minus the nose, Spanish doubloons and ancestors.  The Secondary is largely made up of red worms and
"SIRI, WHERE'S THE REMOTE?" -- "SIRI, BRING ME A BEER!" -- "SIRI, WHERE'S MY DINNER?" -- Wife: "She's either deaf, or had sex with you too."
A cereal from which a tolerably good whisky can with some difficulty be made, and which is used also for bread.  The French are said to eat more bread _per capita_ of population than any other people, which is natural, for only they know how to make the stuff palatable.
A black guy with a parrot on his shoulder walks into a bar... The bartender asks, "Where'd ya get it?" The parrot says, "Africa." (I don't know if you know this one, but I just heard it today)
How do you know if a girl is hungry or horny? Give her a cucumber and see what hole she puts it in. How do know if she's hungry &amp; horny? When she sits on the cucumber and then eats the pickle.
I dared my little brother to lick my dad's ass, and he did. So he dared me to lick my sister's pussy. Just FYI, the ass is called Toots and my sister's cat is Mr. Pickle. We're both 9 and 12
I T H I N K W E S H O U L D R U I N P E O P L E S T I M E L I N E B Y T W E E T I N G L I K E T H I S A L L D A Y . . . . .
"Flight 1234 for noise abatement turn right 45 degrees.." "But Center we are at 35000 feet how much noise can we make up here?" "Sir have you ever heard the noise a 707 makes when it hits a 727?"
Dad asks his kids what the third planet from the sun is called? Kids: - Earth! Dad: - Yeah, but it has another name. Kids: - Oh, dad. We don't know! Tell us! Dad: - Exactly! [drops mic]
A horse walks into a bar... ...and the bartender says "Heeeeyeyeyeyey, why the looooong face?" And the horse replies "Because the guy telling the joke that I'm starring in has bad...comic...*timing.*"
My mate asked me why I have sex noises saved on my iPod. I said, "It's for sound effects during sex." He asked, "Your wife a bit quiet in the sack?" I replied, "No, I work in a morgue."
*logs on Facebook IT'S YOUR OLD HIGH SCHOOL BULLY'S BIRTHDAY TODAY! *logs off WAIT COME BACK! YOU HAVEN'T HEARD ABOUT YOUR EX'S ENGAGEMENT!
sdkgnosdngosdg;klm'gtmq[rasmgladmgladmgladmngksdngksdnkgnadkfgnkasgnkpasngksangkasngkdsgksgnkdgnkdgk; I just hacked the CIA [redacted]
Vampire was searching the garbage... ...and the man came and asked him...  M: what are you doing?  V: I am looking for used tampons...  M: why?  V: My wife is sick, I have to make her some tea!
Attributed to Mr Rogers... ...supposedly told by him to a FOAF on his first day on the job as a cameraman on Mr Rogers Neighborhood. Knock knock. Who's there? Fuck. Fuck who? No, fuck WHOM.
This is very serious ... please read and be aware: IF YOU GET AN E-MAIL TITLED, "NUDE PHOTO OF HILLARY CLINTON," DON'T OPEN IT.... IT CONTAINS A NUDE PHOTO OF HILLARY CLINTON !!
I LOVE YOU ... A man was out for a drink with his wife one night and he said, "I love you". The wife asked, "Is that you or the beer talking" He said, "It's me........ I'm talking to the beer"!
At the sushi restaurant: What kind of eel is this? Diner at the sushi restaurant: "What kind of eel is this?" Waiter: "Do you love it?" Diner: "yeah" Waiter: "Then, that's a moray"
A fat guy.. A fat guy just keep getting fatter every month..after 5 years he got so fat died. At his funeral a friend of him said: Good thing he died, cuz he was about to blow up. (translated)
And this pickup line is broght to you by Budweiser.... And this pickup line is broght to you by Budweiser: ---Budweiser: and who do we have here, standing so pretty and so quiet?
"Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" "Itself" ~History
I was doing a crossword and asked my Jamaican friend for help I asked him, "Hey, what's a 10 letter word for colossal or huge?" He said, "Monumental!" I replied, "No, I'm not."
My mom said if I don't stop using reddit she will bang my head on keyboard But I know she will never do that because she loves medssxcvnklkjfsaarfscnnlknvdgjjbcfggukkfrhhvvvrrjbzddsazvbdwjjhguoiufde
(after bedtime) 3:DADDY COME INTO MY ROOM! Me: go to sleep. 3:YOU HAVE TO COME IN BECAUSE I CAN'T HEAR YOU M: yes you can 3:NO I CAN'T
Germany Q1: What would Germany be called had they not surrendered at the end of WW2 ? A1: Gerfew Q2: What would Germany be called if the issue in Q1 happened before the holocaust? A2: Jewmany
The cashier at the local grocery store asked me if i wanted to donate 2$ to end world hunger, i was like HELL YEAH! I had no idea we were this close! I'm gonna be a god damn hero! Joke by Matt Donaher
HIV Test Where are you getting your test done, at a gay bar? Hey doc do you feel the HIV in my ass yet? Almost, I need to finish first. (As the gay doc fucks your ass and puts the hiv in you.)
There was a half black, half Asian kid in my school. What did some kids call him? A "Chigga" (i'm not a racist, but this made me laugh for long enough to post it here. Please don't get triggered)
"IF YOU'RE HAVING KNITTING PROBLEMS I FEEL BAD FOR YOU SON--" "stop rapping, Grandma" "--I GOT 99 PROBLEMS AND A STITCH AIN'T ONE"
Heisenberg got pulled over by the cops for speeding Winding down his window, he was greeted by a shout of "Do you know how fast you were going?!" "Not a clue, but I know *exactly* where I was."
A wannabee client asked me to find her a one bedroom apartment in Manhattan for $900/month. ...then she added "Oh, I have a 60 pound dog, too." I politely replied: "I don't have a time machine."
Ted Cruz, according to the news, IS planning THat Either cruZ Or his aDminIstrAtion will be Compiling their documents to maKe a IntegraL poLitical announcemEnt this afteRnoon [hope you can decrypt it]
The sacred beetle of the ancient Egyptians, allied to our familiar "tumble-bug."  It was supposed to symbolize immortality, the fact that God knew why giving it its peculiar sanctity.  Its habit of incubating its eggs in a ball of ordure may also have commended it to the favor of the priesthood, and may some day assure it an equal reverence among ourselves.  True, the American beetle is an inferior beetle, but the American priest is an inferior priest.
I THINK I DRANK TOO MUCH SWEET TEA AND I'M SO AWAKE AND NO ONE ELSE SEEMS TO BE AWAKE AND YOU KNOW WHAT I HAVEN'T DONE IN A WHILE, LUNGES!!
*psst... ok ok be quiet... ssshhh...* uhhh... how do you sell a duck to a deaf guy? WANNA BUY A DUCK?!?! Uh... This joke isn't as good written down :-(
Just been to the gym and there's a new machine there. I only used it for about an hour, as I started to feel sick, but it's great: it's got KitKats, Mars bars, crisps and everything in it
Why do I have to say please when I ask for a sandwich at a restaurant? They don't say please when I'm paying. They say, "That'll be $5". I should be able to say, "That'll be a sandwich."
A sacred feast of the religious sect of Theophagi. A dispute once unhappily arose among the members of this sect as to what it was that they ate.  In this controversy some five hundred thousand have already been slain, and the question is still unsettled.
Wife:What is 10 years with me? Wife:What is 10 years with me? Husband:A second. Wife:What is $1000 for me? Husband:A coin. Wife: Ok give me a coin. Husband:Wait a second
Dad joke I just had with my girlfriend GF: *sigh GF: *sigh GF: *sigh Me: That's like 3 sighs in 30 seconds. GF: And they all probably meant different things. Me: I guess I need to know sigh language.
My girlfriend told me that she's sick of me pretending I'm a cat Girlfriend: "I'm sick of you pretending you're a cat. I packed your bags. I want you to go." Me: "Wait, are you kicking MEEEOOWWT???"
Censorious language by oneself concerning another. The word is of classical refinement, and is even said to have been used in a fable by Georgius Coadjutor, one of the most fastidious writers of the fifteenth century--commonly, indeed, regarded as the founder of the Fastidiotic School.  RICE-WATER, n.  A mystic beverage secretly used by our most popular novelists and poets to regulate the imagination and narcotize the conscience.
A form of penance practised by the mediaeval pious. The rite was performed, sometimes with a knife, sometimes with a hot iron, but always, says Arsenius Asceticus, acceptably if the penitent spared himself no pain nor harmless disfigurement.  Scarification, with other crude penances, has now been superseded by benefaction. The founding of a library or endowment of a university is said to yield to the penitent a sharper and more lasting pain
Louise Jokes (my own jokes towards to my friend louise) ENJOY THESE LOUISE JOKES AND ALSO IF YOU DONT UNDERSTAND ANY OF THEM ILL REPLY TO SOME OF THEM THAT I MADE AND ILL EXPLAIN THE JOKE
All bad art comes from returning to life and nature, and elevating them into ideals. Life and nature may sometimes be used as part of art's rough material, but before they are of any real service to art they must be translated into artistic conventions. The moment art surrenders its imaginative medium it surrenders everything. As a method realism is a complete failure, and the two things that every artist should avoid are modernity of form and modernity of subject-matter.
I was in a second hand shop. "I was wondering if you had any condoms?" I asked the owner. "Don't be ridiculous," he remarked, "Of course not." I said, "You're a brave guy, I like your style."
[Spelling Bee] Judge: Your word is 'babe' Bee: B-A-E J: Sorry. There's another 'B' Bee: WHAT! WHERE? *goes crazy* *stings Judge* *dies*
A rain-spout projecting from the eaves of mediaeval buildings, commonly fashioned into a grotesque caricature of some personal enemy of the architect or owner of the building.  This was especially the case in churches and ecclesiastical structures generally, in which the gargoyles presented a perfect rogues' gallery of local heretics and controversialists.  Sometimes when a new dean and chapter were installed the old gargoyles were removed and others substituted having a closer relation to the private animosities of the
Don't hear many Limerick jokes any more. So I wrote one. There was a man named Johnathan Hicks, who liked to write limericks. But his Poems were crude, and many lewd, so his balls were often kicked.
Just met a guy.Omg he was so fit! Just met a guy.Omg he was so fit. Handsome even. Never will I met a guy like him again. Caring. Emotional. Nice. And his name was the first letter of each sentence
I see a border patrol car drive by... So I ask my mexican co-woker if he has his visa. He looks at me cofused for a minute then says "no no I only have debit card" (true story)
A WOMAN: i've only been washing my hair ME: IN THE OFFICE BATHROOM SINK!! ME TOO!! THE WOMAN: once a ME: ONCE I WAKE UP I KNOW SAME ME TOO!!
A Polish person went to have their eyes tested. The eye test chart read: N Y X C S F R U Z. The optom asked, can you read any of those letters?' read it?' the polish person answered, i know him!'
An Eskimo is holidaying in New Zealand.. His car breaks down. A Kiwi stops to help, opens the bonnet, and says "Bro, you've blown a seal" To which the Eskimo responds "so what mate, you fuck sheep!"
[Whole Foods] ME: Hi CLERK: Hello ME: Do you...uh CLERK: Do we what? ME: Do you have any...uh CLERK: Go on ME: Do you have any Half Foods?
What man has sought for is, indeed, neither pain nor pleasure, but simply life. Man has sought to live intensely, fully, perfectly. When he can do so without exercising restraint on others, or suffering it ever, and his activities are all pleasurable to him, he will be saner, healthier, more civilised, more himself. Pleasure is nature's test, her sign of approval. When man is happy he is in harmony with himself and his environment.
Nursing Problems As a Nurse, its my job to have patients - Oh the irony in how the 'patients' have absolutely no patience for me. My job is to save your ass..(colonoscopy etc.) Not Kiss It. :D
A wife comes home and says, "Pack your bags, honey, I just won the lottery!" The guy says, "Great darling. Should I pack for the ocean or the mountains?" She says, "I don't care, get out!"
girl - baby i am wet. Boy - want a paper towel? Girl - no, i want more then that ;) Boy - want 2 paper towels? Girl - no, baby i want something big and round ;) Boy - damn you want the whole roll?
Not competent to be considered.  Said of certain kinds of testimony which juries are supposed to be unfit to be entrusted with, and which judges, therefore, rule out, even of proceedings before themselves alone.  Hearsay evidence is inadmissible because the person quoted was unsworn and is not before the court for examination; yet most momentous actions, military, political, commercial and of every other kind, are daily undertaken on hearsay evidence.  There is no religion in the
There was a French chef... ...And one day he was extremely angry and said he is going to quit. Another man asked him "why?" Then the chef said "All the food is out of date and I've just had un oeuf"
At the Olympics a man walked up to a competitor who was carrying a very long pole. "Excuse me, are you a pole vaulter?" "Nein, I am German, but how did you know my name ist Walter?"
Cow jokes **What do you call a three legged cow?** *Tri tip* **What do you call a cow with no legs?** *Ground beef* **What do you call a masturbating cow?** *Beef Stroganoff*
What do you call it when a German hits you with a loaf of bread? Gluten Tag And when a hippie hits you with a loaf of bread? Flour power And when a lot of people do it at the same time? a rye-ot
Nurse: It's just a little prick.. Me: That's what my gf said! N: Ha M: Haha N: HAHA M: HAHAHA! N: You don't have a gf, do you? M: No.
So it's the first day of shop class... The teacher asks, "What's the difference between a nail, a screw, and a bolt?" A girl raises her hand and says, "I don't know. I've never been bolted before."
On the contrary! He elected to punish their children, all through the ages to the end of time, for a trifling offense committed by others before they were born. He is punishing them yet. In mild ways? No, in atrocious ones.
A Zach Galifinakis-style "impression" joke. The character I'm working on is: MOMENTARILY CONFUSED BATMAN &lt;husky voice&gt;: Alfred... &lt;regular voice&gt;: Ahem... I mean hey Alfred
The so-called god of love.  This bastard creation of a barbarous fancy was no doubt inflicted upon mythology for the sins of its deities.  Of all unbeautiful and inappropriate conceptions this is the most reasonless and offensive.  The notion of symbolizing sexual love by a semisexless babe, and comparing the pains of passion to the wounds of an arrow--of introducing this pudgy homunculus into art grossly to materialize the subtle spirit and suggestion of the work
2 Cats on the Titanic So there were 2 cats on the Titanic. The first was called "One two three" and the other was "Un deux trois". "One two three" cat was rescued. But "Un deux trois" cat sank.
As a kid i looked up to Bill Nye the science guy, but as of today after learning about him i will probably look down on him. And people at my level would agree. I'm 6'3 and he is 6 feet tall.
A mathematician stumbles home drunk at 3 a.m. ...and his wife is livid. "You SWORE that you'd be home by 11:45!" "No," slurs the mathematician... "I said I'd be home by a quarter of 12."
I remember the first time I had sex, I put the condom on the wrong way round. The girl looked and me and said, "You're so stupid" I said, "What?" "You're supposed to do that before sex." she replied.
Me: ... Dog: ... Me: ... Dog: ... Me: .. Dog: .. Me: ... Dog: .. Me: .. Dog: .. Me: ... Dog: ... (Women, take note *ahem* Man's best friend)
Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws. Their origin is pure vanity. Their result is absolutely nil. They give us now and then some of those luxurious, sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak. That is all that can be said for them. They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account.
If you're riding a horse at full speed along side a giraffe and a lion is chasing you, what do you do? Get your drunk ass off the merry-go-round. Props to the radio station I heard this on today.
Q: Why did Hitler shoot himself? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . He lost WW2.
A man goes to a job interview... Interviewer: "What's your greatest weakness?" Man: "Probably my honesty." Interviewer: "I don't think that's a weakness." Man: "I don't give a fuck what you think."
Privation of that which we had, or had not.  Thus, in the latter sense, it is said of a defeated candidate that he "lost his election"; and of that eminent man, the poet Gilder, that he has "lost his mind."  It is in the former and more legitimate sense, that the word is used in the famous epitaph:  Here Huntington's ashes long have lain Whose loss is our eternal gain, For while he exercised all his powers
First Kiss BF finally Kissed Her GF GF: Wow i can't believe that a Kiss is so nice.. BF: Ofcourse I told you.. Is it Your First Kiss? (smiling) GF: Yes! since my EX Boyfriends wants sex right away
"I've never flown before said the  nervous old lady to the pilot. "You will bring me down safely won't  you? "All I can say ma'am" said the pilot "is that I've never left  anyone up there yet!"
Do you want to hear a bad joke? *my life* Sorry if that was not likeable and miserable, *just like my face* Okay, I am going to stop before it gets too dark and too empty, *just like my soul.*
A famous piece of antique scripture representing a priest of that name and his two sons in the folds of two enormous serpents. The skill and diligence with which the old man and lads support the serpents and keep them up to their work have been justly regarded as one of the noblest artistic illustrations of the mastery of human intelligence over brute inertia.
So a Jewish boy walks up to his father... a Jewish boy walks up to his father and asks him for $5. His father responds: "$4? What do you need $3 for? Here's $2, split it with your brother."
NORTH WEST KIM AND KANYE HAVE DECIDED TO NAME THE BABY 'NORTH'. I WONDER IF THE BABY WAS CONCIEVED AT THE MILE HIGH CLUB ON NORTH WEST AIRLINES
He has salaried teachers who tell him that. They also tell him there is a hell, of everlasting fire, and that he will go to it if he doesn't keep the Commandments. What are Commandments? They are a curiosity. I will tell you about them by and by.
Coffee Joke [OC] So the coffee asked the creamer, "Are you outraged by our working conditions too, or do you support management?" The creamer replied, "I'm half and half." ^^^I'm ^^^Sorry.
A saber-tooth tiger arrives at a cave party Where it's friends had been partying with a bunch of cave-people. "I see I'm too late," says the tiger. "Yup," says another. "Everyone's eaten"
I REALIZED THAT I AM THE VICTIM After ten years of marriage, the wife asks her husband: - Honey, are you by nature a winner or a loser? - Honey, over the years I realized that I am the victim ...
A large bird to which (for its sins, doubtless) nature has denied that hinder toe in which so many pious naturalists have seen a conspicuous evidence of design.  The absence of a good working pair of wings is no defect, for, as has been ingeniously pointed out, the ostrich does not fly.  OTHERWISE, adv.  No better.
[blind date] So,where you from? [eyes turn black] T h E S E v E n T H C i R C L e O F H e L L Oh nice. ever miss it? [cries blood] Y e s
I was on a first date "How many women have you slept with?" she asked. I said, "Do you want me to round it to the nearest ten?" "Oh, I say! Go on then," she laughed. I said, "Zero"
Whats your name? Whats the color of the sky?... Me: whats your name? You:(insert name) Me:whats the color of the sky? You:blue Me:whats my name? Now put it all together.
Boy: *calls 911*......... Boy: *calls 911* Hello? I need your help! 911: Alright, What is it? Boy: Two girls are fighting over me! 911: So what's your emergency? Boy: The ugly one is winning.
One of the nine Muses.  Clio's function was to preside over history--which she did with great dignity, many of the prominent citizens of Athens occupying seats on the platform, the meetings being addressed by Messrs. Xenophon, Herodotus and other popular speakers.
But now they could do evil -- and suffer for it; now they had acquired what the Church calls an invaluable possession, the Moral Sense; that sense which differentiates man from the beast and sets him above the beast. Instead of below the beast -- where one would suppose his proper place would be, since he is always foul-minded and guilty and the beast always clean-minded and innocent. It is like valuing a watch that must go wrong, above a watch that can't.
"tell... my wife... i loved her..." carl dies. NOO! U LOVED HER WHAT?! *shakes body* U LOVED HER... TITYS? HER CAT? *slaps face* PLS WAKE UP
I walked in a Library... I walked in a library and asked the librarian for a book about small penises. The librarian said, "I'm not sure if it's in yet". I replied "Yeah, that's the one"
A kind of net for effecting an involuntary change of environment.  For fish it is made strong and coarse, but women are more easily taken with a singularly delicate fabric weighted with small, cut stones.  The devil casting a seine of lace, (With precious stones 'twas weighted) Drew it into the landing place And its contents calculated.  All souls of women were in that sack-- A draft miraculous, precious! But ere he could throw it across his back They'd
Lol , Toilet (potty) Humour, funny A : Have you heard of the movie "Constipation" ? B: No -- A: Obviously because it hasnt come out as yet .. LOL B: You are so fucking Stupid ..
There are two cavemen sitting by a fire... [OC] One is eating some bugs he found, and he says to the other, "You like beetles?" and his friend says, "No, *CRUNCH CRUNCH*, me more of a stones guy."
Chemistry joke thread? I'll start: I was at -273.15C one time. It was OK. What do you do with a dead chemist? Barium I'm sorry guys there really are no good chemistry jokes: all the good ones argon.
While I was living in Japan a woman approached me on the train... She said to me, "What's black and white and red all over?" "Wow," I said, "You can speak English?" "Just a riddle," she said.
Fella goes to the house of ill repute. Lady meets him at the door and he asks "how much"? "$25" she sezs. "You gotta be putting me on", sez Fella. "No, that's another $5" sez Lady.
Germanwings 'Knock Knock' joke. *Knock Knock* Who's there? *A Germanwings pilot* A Germanwings pilot who? **LUBITZ, LET ME IN GODDAMNIT, YOU'RE GONNA CRASH THE PLANE!!**
By the woman's make, her plant has to be out of service three days in the month, and during a part of her pregnancy. These are times of discomfort, often of suffering. For fair and just compensation she has the high privilege of unlimited adultery all the other days of her life.
Tell 'em how it 'tis, not how it 'twas: Edition 3. The joke used to be "If ya lick 'er, it's quicker". Now it's: if ya pin 'er, yer in 'er.
'welcome to subway how can i-' ME:*punches counter*WHY DOES THE KOOL-AID MAN CARRY A SMALLER PITCHER OF KOOL-AID 'sir-' M: IS IT HIS PISS
WHAT IS SEX? HUSBAND: A minute of PLEASURE, then years of PRESSURE! WIFE: Moments of ECSTASY, followed by decades of SLAVERY! MISTRESS: Just stolen TIME, but never MINE! HOOKER: NEXT!
So I'm ordering a coffee... I tell the barista, "French Roast, two sugars, no cream." The barista responds, "I'm sorry sir we're all out of cream, would you like your coffee without any milk instead?"
Thousands and thousands of those things are very difficult to catch, and if Noah had not given up and resigned, he would be on the job yet, as Leviticus used to say. However, I do not mean that he withdrew. No, he did not do that. He gathered as many creatures as he had room for, and then stopped.
"Nice place!" Mmmehh "Hungry?" Mmmehh "You look nice." Mmmehh "DO I EVEN MAKE YOU HAPPY?!?" Mmmehh "Mom told me not to date a goat."
In an English class... Teacher: David, give me a sentence starting with "I." David: I is... Teacher: No, David. You must always say "I am." David: Oh right. I am the ninth letter of the alphabet.
A man asks a woman: "-Did you know that laughter is second best way to convince a girl to have sex with you ? " "-Really, what is the first ?" "-A knife." "-Hahaha, you're so funny !" "-Good choice."
"THE WORLD REVOLVES AROUND ME" - KANYE "THE WORLD REVOLVES AROUND WEED" - WIZ "THE WORLD DOESN'T REVOLVE AT ALL" -B.O.B.
One of a race of highly improper demons who, though probably not wholly extinct, may be said to have seen their best nights.  For a complete account of _incubi_ and _succubi_, including _incubae_ and _succubae_, see the _Liber Demonorum_ of Protassus (Paris, 1328), which contains much curious information that would be out of place in a dictionary intended as a text-book for the public schools.
I had to go into the Dr's today for a regular check up, &amp; I get in there &amp; he pulls down my pants &amp; started jamming his finger in my ass... Yea I guess it's time for a new dentist
(JOKE)."KERMIT THE FROG" vanndukeandsammy sammy:what is kermit the frog favorite food?....vann duke: I don't know,tell me what is kermit the frog favorite food?....sammy:french flies!
A man is chasing a talking emu... The Emu is taunting him, saying "you can't catch me! I can run at 80 km/h, you can only manage 20!" to which the the man replies "You can run but you can't fly!"
Coming Out Girl: Dad Dad: yeah? Girl; I have Bad News Dad: What Is It Sweetie?? Girl: I'm A Lesbian... Dad: Ok... Other Sister: I'm Lesbian Too Dad: Does Anyone In This Family Like Boys!!! Son; I Do
Son, Do U Also Treat Piles. A Couple In Train Girl- My Hand Is Paining, Boy Kisses The Hand, Girl- My Neck Is Paining, Boy Kisses The Neck, An Old Man Asks Boy, Son, Do U Also Treat Piles.
MY DENTIST ASKED HIS ASSISTANT TO SUCTION (THE WATER OUT OF MY MOUTH)BUT I THOUGHT HE WAS TALKING TO ME SO I SUCKED HIS FINGER. IM MORTIFIED
Yeah I'm married, but get one thing straight,,, I do WHAT I want, WHEN I wanhjkjhgfd,, THIS IS SCOTT'S WIFE, HE HAS TO GO NOW, HE SAYS GOODNIGHT.
How do you know if your friend, "Doesn't even OWN a TV?" Because it's this answer to every question you ask them. "Did you hear about the President's new policy on...?" "I don't even OWN a TV!"
Relating to a mountain in Thessaly, once inhabited by gods, now a repository of yellowing newspapers, beer bottles and mutilated sardine cans, attesting the presence of the tourist and his appetite.  His name the smirking tourist scrawls Upon Minerva's temple walls, Where thundered once Olympian Zeus, And marks his appetite's abuse.  Averil Joop
A man said to me, "Man, I was so wasted last night I went home and blew chunks!" I said, "most people are sick after drinking too much." "No, you don't understand." he replied. "Chunks is my pitbull."
A place where astronomers conjecture away the guesses of their predecessors.  OBSESSED, p.p.  Vexed by an evil spirit, like the Gadarene swine and other critics.  Obsession was once more common than it is now. Arasthus tells of a peasant who was occupied by a different devil for every day in the week, and on Sundays by two.  They were frequently seen, always walking in his shadow, when he had one, but were
A dead sinner revised and edited.  The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator, Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called saint:  "I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint.  He was fond of saying indelicate things, and used to cheat at cards.  In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool."
It's raining, It's pouring... I really should be snoring. I cleared my head with sudafed I won't get to sleep until morning. (I know, I know, it's not really a joke because it's true)
Two muffins in an oven. One muffin turns to the other and says, "Is it hot in here or is it just me?" The other one looks at him and replies, "HOLY SHIT, A TAKING MUFFIN!!"
An asian asks for help at an airport... Asian: "why is my plane late? It said it would be here at 6:30." Airplane help guy: "fluctuations." Asian: "fluck you americans too."
Guy calls 911... ...says, "Help me, help me, my wife's having a baby!" 911 Operator says, "Ok, sir, remain calm, is this her first child?" Guy says "No, it's her fucking husband!"
A spiritual pickle preserving the body from decay.  We live in daily apprehension of its loss; yet when lost it is not missed. The question, "Is life worth living?" has been much discussed; particularly by those who think it is not, many of whom have written at great length in support of their view and by careful observance of the laws of health enjoyed for long terms of years the honors of successful controversy.  "Life's not worth living, and that's the truth,"
A person is drowning and yelling "HELP I DON'T KNOW HOW TO SWIM" A bystander tells him to shut up because he doesn't know how to swim either but he's not freaking out about it like the guy drowning.
A man goes to the lawyer: "What is your fee?" Lawyer says: "1000 US dollars for 3 questions." Man: "Wow - so much! Isn't it a bit expensive?" Lawyer: "Yes, what is your third question?"
Life is to enjoy with whatever you have with you ;) An old man had 8 hair on his head. He went to a barber shop. Barber in anger asked: Shall i cut or count? Old man smiled and said: "Colour it!" :D
One's days are too brief to take the burden of another's sorrows on one's shoulders. Each man lives his own life, and pays his own price for living it. The only pity is that one has to pay so often for a single fault. One has to pay over and over again, indeed. In her dealings with man Destiny never closes her accounts.
A member of the Parliamentarian party in the English civil war--so called from his habit of wearing his hair short, whereas his enemy, the Cavalier, wore his long.  There were other points of difference between them, but the fashion in hair was the fundamental cause of quarrel.  The Cavaliers were royalists because the king, an indolent fellow, found it more convenient to let his hair grow than to wash his neck.  This the Roundheads, who were mostly barbers
The past is of no importance. The present is of no importance. It is with the future that we have to deal. For the past is what men should not have been. The present is what men ought not to be. The future is what artists are.
The son to his dad * Son - Dad at last i lost my virginity- * Dad -OH! so good son, i am proud of you, come on, sit here and tell me- * Son -I don't think i could sit for a while
A bear walks up to a rabbit and asks "Do you have a problem with shit getting stuck in your fur?" Asks BEAR. The rabbit looked taken back, "Uhh, No" So the bear wiped his ass on the rabbit.
Two men at the Communist Nudist Colony are sitting on the porch... One turns to the other and says, "I say old boy, have you read marx?" The other says, "Yes, I believe it's these wicker chairs."
Who.. Plays The Guitar.. Boy: How Do i play the guitar ??? Girls: You Should be on TV for your talent. Boy: Am i so good ??..... Boy : if you were on TV, i can atleast switch it off...
[SPELLING BEE] JUDGE: Tim, your word is "Oak" TIM: [deep breath] Ok *BUZZER* T: What th J: So close! It's O-'A'-K T: But... J: Hard luck, kid
Timmy comes home with a bad maths test result Dad: "If your next test result is bad, I won't think you as my son." A few days later Dad: "How was your history test?" Timmy: "Who the hell are you?"
He lifted His hand, and from it burst a fountain-spray of fire, a million stupendous suns, which clove the blackness and soared, away and away and away, diminishing in magnitude and intensity as they pierced the far frontiers of Space, until at last they were but as diamond nailheads sparkling under the domed vast roof of the universe.
There are 2 LOSERS who hang out at the same sidewalk corner everyday... The taller LOSER says to the other "Hey man, have you seen my keys?". The other LOSER replies, "No, have you seen my wallet?".
A popular character in old Italian plays, who imitated with ludicrous incompetence the _buffone_, or clown, and was therefore the ape of an ape; for the clown himself imitated the serious characters of the play.  The zany was progenitor to the specialist in humor, as we to-day have the unhappiness to know him.  In the zany we see an example of creation; in the humorist, of transmission.  Another excellent specimen of the modern z
10 ways to cut down on click bait! 1. Don't click 2. Don't click 3. Don't click 4. Don't click 5. Don't click 6. Don't click 7. Don't click 8. Don't click 9. Don't click 10. Don't click
The tribute of a fool to the worth of the nearest ass.  They say that hens do cackle loudest when There's nothing vital in the eggs they've laid; And there are hens, professing to have made A study of mankind, who say that men Whose business 'tis to drive the tongue or pen Make the most clamorous fanfaronade O'er their most worthless work; and I'm afraid They're not entirely different from the hen. Lo! the
What is the best joke you have heard that was on the end of a Popsicle stick? Here is mine: Q: Where do snowmen dance? --------- A: At the snowball. Best joke at the end of a Popsicle stick
A curved sword of exceeding keenness, in the conduct of which certain Orientals attain a surprising proficiency, as the incident here related will serve to show.  The account is translated from the Japanese of Shusi Itama, a famous writer of the thirteenth century.  When the great Gichi-Kuktai was Mikado he condemned to decapitation Jijiji Ri, a high officer of the Court.  Soon after the hour appointed for performance of the rite what was
A mutual agreement to share life's miseries, where one partner’s snoring is the other's lullaby, and both pretend the other's habits are charming rather than infuriating. A contractual obligation to love, honor, and endure each other's cooking, with the hope that death does the parting before divorce lawyers do.
Why do mermaids wear seashells? Because D-shells are too big and B- shells are too small. *A random elderly woman just stopped in the street in front off where I was sitting and told me this. Awesome*
Le dice una madre a su hijo "Me ha dicho un pajarito que te drogas!"... El hijo responde: "La que se debe estar drogando eres tu que andas hablando con pajaros"
"I was in a very generous mood today" a woman says to her friend. "I gave a poor beggar $25." "Thats a lot of money to give away" says her friend. "What did your husband say?" "He said 'Thank you'. "
A quadruped (the _Splaypes humpidorsus_) of great value to the show business.  There are two kinds of camels--the camel proper and the camel improper.  It is the latter that is always exhibited.
An Englishman an Irishman &amp; a Scotsman... An Englishman an Irishman &amp; a Scotsman get into a cab. The driver turns around and says "Sorry gents I'm Muslim, I can't take a joke."
After a long time and many questions, Satan said, "The spider kills the fly, and eats it; the bird kills the spider and eats it; the wildcat kills the goose; the -- well, they all kill each other. It is murder all along the line. Here are countless multitudes of creatures, and they all kill, kill, kill, they are all murderers. And they are not to blame, Divine One?"
Two cavemen in the Ice Age are in their cave. One has a philosophical moment pop into his mind. He then says "what is *UP*?". The next caveman says "I don't know, just chilling what's up with you?".
Obi-Wan captured a Sith and bring him to Yoda. Obi-Wan: Should I kill the Sith or let him go? Yoda: Kill him... \*Obi-Wan executes the Sith.\* Yoda: ...you must not.
A guy calls 911 Guy: *calls 911* Hello? I need your help! 911: Alright, What is it? Guy: Two girls are fighting over me! 911: So what's your emergency? Guy: The ugly one is winning.
Beating up band nerds with witty comebacks *Impales Flutist* "Must be flute poisoning" *Bludgeons French Horn Player* "Am I making you horny?" *Throws Tuba player off cliff* "Tu...bad"
A pageant whereby we attest our respect for the dead by enriching the undertaker, and strengthen our grief by an expenditure that deepens our groans and doubles our tears.  The savage dies--they sacrifice a horse To bear to happy hunting-grounds the corse. Our friends expire--we make the money fly In hope their souls will chase it to the sky.  Jex Wopley
Classroom Nerd (In a high school class room) Girl: Do you see that F@#$ING nerd over there. Teacher: Don't be so mean, he could be your boss one day. Nerd: Sorry I don't plan on being a pimp
My dad's better than your dad... Three kids are in an agruement about who's dad is better. "My dad's a fireman" said Billy. "My dad's a marine!" said Johnny. "My dad's invisible." said Brian.
If Sam McCringle can mingle with a single bag of Pringles in the time it takes to sing a single jingle, with how many Pringles did Sam McCringle mingle? none... Pringles come in cans
How many Gentlesirs does it take to screw in a lightbulb? "Screw is such a harsh word, M'Lightbulb. I have too much respect for lamps to use it." &lt;Tips fedora&gt;
One gypsy says to another... Back in the day, when I was young, my mother would give me 1 dollar and I would get 2 bottles of milk, 2 breads, 5 kilos of meat... and now..cameras everywhere...
Pertaining to Malthus and his doctrines.  Malthus believed in artificially limiting population, but found that it could not be done by talking.  One of the most practical exponents of the Malthusian idea was Herod of Judea, though all the famous soldiers have been of the same way of thinking.
Two Irish schoolboys... 1: Hey, Pat! What's the craic? 2: Not much, Brian. I had a pint yesterday. 1: Oh! Really? I thought you were only 15? 2: I am! 1: So what was it? Guiness? 2: No, it was water.
So a polar bear walks into a bar... and says, "I'll have a gin.....and tonic" The bartender says, "What's with the big pause?" And the polar bear says, "Oh, I've always had them."
Heard this one in a film you all might have seen A man is talking to his son and says, "You know, son, if you don't stop masturbating, you're going to go blind." The son says, "Dad, I'm over here."
Did you hear about the guy who escaped from a lunatic asylum, raped a bunch of old women in a laundrette then ran away? The newspaper headlines the next day read: #**NUT SCREWS WASHERS AND BOLTS**#
What does FEMINISM stands for? **F**ighting **E**quality and **M**en to **I**nstitutionalize **N**arcissism and **I**gnorance and **S**top **M**eritocracy
Am thinking of watching "Les Miserables". Am dying to find out why this dude Les is so sad. If I could just meet this Les guy and cheer him up, he'd be... (wait for it)... less miserable. :P
"I have told you nothing about man that is not true." You must pardon me if I repeat that remark now and then in these letters; I want you to take seriously the things I am telling you, and I feel that if I were in your place and you in mine, I should need that reminder from time to time, to keep my credulity from flagging.
So the woman sitting next to me on a plane with an infant in her lap looks over to me and asks, "do you mind if I breast feed?" And I respond, "no thanks I already ate." Too harsh of a dad joke?
People come up to me all the time in the street and they ask me, they ask me: "Say, Paul, what's the Mahabharata?" And I say to them, I say, "Oh, just a bit of light reading."
(NSFW) Let's have a bet Let's have a bet. When I grow up, I'm gonna be a good dad. If I am a good dad, you will give me a million pounds. If I'm not, I'll beat the shit out of my kids, deal?
The Planets 71% water + 29% land = Earth 100% land + 0% Chocolate = Mars 100% land + 0% Fertility = Venus 100% land and lava + 0% Freddy = Mercury 100% land + 0% Dog = Pluto 100% gas = Uranus
A girl approaches a guy... Girl: Do you drink? Guy: No. Girl: Do you do drugs? Guy: No. Girl: Do you watch porn? Guy: No. Girl: Then how do you have fun? Guy: I lie to people.
The ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  (See _Molecule_.)  According to Leibnitz, as nearly as he seems willing to be understood, the monad has body without bulk, and mind without manifestation--Leibnitz knows him by the innate power of considering.  He has founded upon him a theory of the universe, which the creature bears without resentment, for the monad is a gentleman. Small as he is, the monad contains all
An American and a German were playing "Thumb War" "One, two, three, four, I declare a thumb war." "Five, six, seven, eight, I use this hand to masturbate." "Einz, zwei, drei, so do I."
An officer of the Government, whose duty it is to enforce the wishes of the legislative power until such time as the judicial department shall be pleased to pronounce them invalid and of no effect.  Following is an extract from an old book entitled, _The Lunarian Astonished_--Pfeiffer & Co., Boston, 1803:  LUNARIAN:  Then when your Congress has passed a law it goes directly to the Supreme Court in order that it may at once be known whether
Tell me your best "When is a --- not a ---?" joke I'll start you off: When is a door not a door? &gt; When it's ajar! When are eyes not eyes? &gt; When the wind makes them water!
It is quite a mistake to believe, as many people do, that the mind shows itself in the face. Vice may sometimes write itself in lines and changes of contour, but that is all. Our faces are really masks given to us to conceal our minds with.
Little Johnny comes home one day... and says, "Mom! Little Mark next door has a penis like a peanut!" "What do you mean, Johnny? Is it shaped like a peanut?" "No," says Johnny. "It's salty"
Reparation without satisfaction.  Among the Anglo-Saxon a subject conceiving himself wronged by the king was permitted, on proving his injury, to beat a brazen image of the royal offender with a switch that was afterward applied to his own naked back.  The latter rite was performed by the public hangman, and it assured moderation in the plaintiff's choice of a switch.  RED-SKIN, n.  A North American Indian, whose skin is not red--at least not
Yesterday my dad told me if he saw me on the computer latenight again... He would smash my head into my keyHDJbdvxhjJDKLXUXBgshdjcmcnGxcNdnckcoNcbcjxndbcjcjkxndJdhhshdbdn
A person distinguishable from a civilian by his uniform and from a soldier by his gait.  Fresh from the farm or factory or street, His marching, in pursuit or in retreat, Were an impressive martial spectacle Except for two impediments--his feet.  Thompson Johnson
ok ok so my last one wasn't very popular ,but i got another one !! here it goes ... "i don't beeleeve you" get it ? it's a joke about bees !!!!! XD upvote it it was funy and made u laugh ..
In American society, an English tourist above the state of a costermonger, as, lord 'Aberdasher, Lord Hartisan and so forth.  The traveling Briton of lesser degree is addressed as "Sir," as, Sir 'Arry Donkiboi, or 'Amstead 'Eath.  The word "Lord" is sometimes used, also, as a title of the Supreme Being; but this is thought to be rather flattery than true reverence.
An old man was sitting there trying to dook 1 out... His dooker was all empty, void of a duke. As he, sat there and peed, shat free, he re,alized, that he, was, "squeezin for no reason"
"Knock Knock" "Whos there?" "From" "From who?" "Its pronounced, From *whom*!" Sorry for bad joke, please leave your criticism! I need it to make funnier jokes! P.S. its not!
[at dave's who has like 9 dogs] me: "what d'you call a fly with no wings" dave: "keith dont" me: "a WALK!" [drowns in a tidal wave of dogs]
1st old man says "I wish I could pee with no problems", 2nd old man says "I wish I could poop easily", 3rd old man says "I easily do both by 10am...." ".... problem is, I don't wake up til noon"
What do you call a gay loaf of bread? A faguette ^^^^I ^^^^just ^^^^made ^^^^this ^^^^up ^^^^and ^^^^I'm ^^^^so ^^^^proud
Did you get that????? Unscramble these words! 1.) PNEIS 2.) HTIELR 3.) NGGERI 4.) BUTTSXE Did you get SPINE, LITHER, GINGER and SUBTEXT?
Saw this on a wall while on some down time in the restroom, made me laugh ...Silly This is my first time posting, but this made me laugh ... Whats brown and rhymes with Snoop? ... .. Answer: Dr.Dre
An imaginary state of quality distinguished from the actual by an element known as excellence; an attribute of the critic.  The editor of an English magazine having received a letter pointing out the erroneous nature of his views and style, and signed "Perfection," promptly wrote at the foot of the letter:  "I don't agree with you," and mailed it to Matthew Arnold.
To move forward uncertainly, from side to side, as one carrying the white man's burden.  (From _zed_, _z_, and _jag_, an Icelandic word of unknown meaning.)  He zedjagged so uncomen wyde Thet non coude pas on eyder syde; So, to com saufly thruh, I been Constreynet for to doodge betwene.  Munwele
A lie that has not cut its teeth.  An habitual liar's nearest approach to truth:  the perigee of his eccentric orbit.  When David said:  "All men are liars," Dave, Himself a liar, fibbed like any thief. Perhaps he thought to weaken disbelief By proof that even himself was not a slave To Truth; though I suspect the aged knave Had been of all her servitors the chief Had he but known a fig's reluctant leaf Is more than
In Law, a previous decision, rule or practice which, in the absence of a definite statute, has whatever force and authority a Judge may choose to give it, thereby greatly simplifying his task of doing as he pleases.  As there are precedents for everything, he has only to ignore those that make against his interest and accentuate those in the line of his desire.  Invention of the precedent elevates the trial-at-law from the low estate of a fortuitous ordeal to
Shopping with girlfriend, she says, "let's go down this aisle." Me - K. Why? Her - It's a surprise. Me - K. Why? Her - Just grab that. *points* Me - K. Why? Her - KY. Me - K... Her - Y.
Any material thing, having no particular value, that may be held by A against the cupidity of B.  Whatever gratifies the passion for possession in one and disappoints it in all others.  The object of man's brief rapacity and long indifference.
Wanna hear a joke? "Why did the chicken cross the road?" "Why?" "To get to the house of the ugliest human on the planet. Wanna hear another joke? Knock-knock...." "Who's there?" "Buc-buc-bucaaaaaw!"
A man comes home to his wife with a big bunch of flowers... "I suppose I'll have to keep my legs open for the next few days!" The wife says. The husband replies, "Why? Don't you have any vases?"
Poor Schapelle Corby, shes missed out on so much the past 10 years. Imagine the 1st time she goes to use the self serve checkouts at coles 'Unexpected item in bag.' "Shit not this again"
Q - Why are bachelors thin, and married men fat? A - Bachelors come home, check to see what's in the fridge, and go to bed. Married men come home, check to see what's in the bed, and go the fridge.
What's the difference between a cranky two-year-old and a duckling? One is a whiny toddler, and the other is a tiny waddler! ^^^... ^^^I ^^^know, ^^^I ^^^know, ^^^/r/dadjokes ^^^is ^^^thataway
A man goes to the doctor He says he has been having dreams where one night, he is a teepee, and the other night he is a wigwam. Doctor says: "That's an easy one, you're too tense!" (Two tents)
Tommy went to his mom in the kitchen and said: 'Mom! Mom! The dog is having sex!' So mom says: 'Try not to pay attention to it, sweetheart.' to which Tommy responds: 'But it hurts so much!'
It is always painful to part with people whom one has known for a very brief space of time. The absence of old friends one can endure with equanimity. But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one has just been introduced is almost unbearable.
There are two goldfishes in a bowl. There are two goldfishes in a fish bowl. One says to the other, "Trevor, why do the humans think us fish are stupid?" Trevor says, "Sorry, who are you again?"
Gaytway 'Gay' is a tricky word. If someone asks 'are you gay?' If you respond no, it mean you are not happy with your life...if your response is yes, it means you are not happy with your wife!
[me as a magician] *pulls rabbit from hat* AUDIENCE: ooOoOo *pulls knife from hat* A: ooOoOo *pulls sautee pan from hat* A: NNOOOOOO
My girlfriend said that a sneeze is 1/10th of an orgasm. "That's a bullshit myth," I said. "Prove it," she replied. After sneezing ten times I said, "See? I'm still awake and you're not pregnant."
Did you hear about the man who stole that train this morning??? Some say he had a... Loco-motive! I have no life and just made that up while playing gta5... Ill show myself to the door... :'(
A guy in a public place, phone out, camera on... He approaches a young woman. "What are you doing, creep?" she says. He glances up, smiles, and says "Calm down. I'm just trying to get a Pikachu."
Conduct, as determined, not by principle, but by breeding.  The word seems to be somewhat loosely used in Dr. Jamrach Holobom's translation of the following lines from the _Dies Irae_:  Recordare, Jesu pie, Quod sum causa tuae viae. Ne me perdas illa die.  Pray remember, sacred Savior, Whose the thoughtless hand that gave your Death-blow.  Pardon such
A man comes home to his wife "honey," he says, "pack your bags. I just won the lottery!" "That's amazing! What should I pack?" "I don't care. Just pack your bags and get the fuck out of here."
A very large woman was walking her dog... and as she walked by I said "nice pig," she looked at me with a puzzled face and said "that's no pig, it's my dog." I replied with "I was talking to the dog."
If Philae finds an inhabitant on the comet what would be its first words? I'm a Comedian ^((because people from Mars are Martians)^) ^^And. ^^I'll ^^show ^^myself ^^out
Wife:Stop watching porn Wife: (shouting) Stop watching porn, I can hear it in the kitchen . . . . . Husband: . . . . I'm not, it's Sharapova vs Serena... I'm watching tennis....
Parents w/ 1st Baby: "Aww he's starting to walk! C'mon buddy, u can do it!" Parents w/ Baby #4: "SHIT, HE'S STANDING! QUICK, SWEEP THE LEG!"
Shall We Try Different Position Tonight? Wife: Shall We Try Different Position Tonight? Husband: "Excellent idea!" Wife: OK YOU Stand at Sink and Wash Dishes AND I Will Lie On Sofa And Watch TV..;-p
Confessions A man goes to a priest and says : "Father i have sinned a lot lately. I hustled some money from a Jew". The priest answers :"Son that's not a sin, it's a MIRACLE ! "
A signal to sleeping soldiers to dream of battlefields no more, but get up and have their blue noses counted.  In the American army it is ingeniously called "rev-e-lee," and to that pronunciation our countrymen have pledged their lives, their misfortunes and their sacred dishonor.
A man and a Giraffe walk into a bar. The Giraffe gets drunk and falls on the floor unconscious. The bartender says "you can't leave that lyin' there." The man says "its not a Lion, its a Giraffe"
A husband and a wife sit at the table, having dinner. The woman drops a bit of tomato sauce on her white top. "Och, I look like a pig!" The man nods, "And you dropped tomato sauce on your top."
What's the funniest joke you've heard that can be told to a 5th grader? I always loved this one: (works better said out loud of course) What do you call a fish with no eyes? ... A FSHHH
The first woman on the Moon contacted Houston. "Houston, we have a problem." *"What is it?"* "Never mind." *"What's the problem?"* "It's nothing." *"Please tell us."* "I'm fine."
James Bond walks into a bar... James Bond walks into a bar and sits next to a chicken. Chicken: What's your name? Bond: My name's Bond. James Bond. Chicken: Nice to meet you, I'm Ken. Chick Ken.
An instrument used chiefly for the purpose of putting dead animals into the mouth.  Formerly the knife was employed for this purpose, and by many worthy persons is still thought to have many advantages over the other tool, which, however, they do not altogether reject, but use to assist in charging the knife.  The immunity of these persons from swift and awful death is one of the most striking proofs of God's mercy to those that hate Him.  FORMA PAUPERIS.  [
Why did u eat it??? A lady was pregnant. Her son asked her "Mom, What's in u'r tummy?" Mom answered "Its a sweet, lovely baby." Son says, "If the baby is so sweet and lovely then WHY DID U EAT IT???"
Our principal is so stupid Boy: Our principal is so stupid. Girl: Don't you know who i am? Boy: No. Girl: I'm the principal's daughter. Boy: Do you know who i am? Girl: No. Boy: Good (walks away)
Another "Priceless" joke. Vodka 19.99. Motel room 64.99. Condoms 9.99. Finding out she swallows and likes it in the ass? Priceless! Fuck Mastercard, it pays to Discover
A period of twenty-four hours, mostly misspent.  This period is divided into two parts, the day proper and the night, or day improper--the former devoted to sins of business, the latter consecrated to the other sort.  These two kinds of social activity overlap.
[Wall Street] ME: haha Hump Day, amiright? HUMPTY DUMPTY *rolls eyes* ME: eh? *nudge* HD: Dude don't- ME: eh? *harder nudge* EH? Oh shit
Pertaining to symbols and the use and interpretation of symbols.  They say 'tis conscience feels compunction; I hold that that's the stomach's function, For of the sinner I have noted That when he's sinned he's somewhat bloated, Or ill some other ghastly fashion Within that bowel of compassion. True, I believe the only sinner Is he that eats a shabby dinner. You know how Adam with good reason, For eating apples out of season, Was "
A living person whom death has deprived of the power of filial ingratitude--a privation appealing with a particular eloquence to all that is sympathetic in human nature.  When young the orphan is commonly sent to an asylum, where by careful cultivation of its rudimentary sense of locality it is taught to know its place.  It is then instructed in the arts of dependence and servitude and eventually turned loose to prey upon the world as a bootblack or scullery maid.
The pig's reply to proponents of porcophagy.  Moses Mendlessohn having fallen ill sent for a Christian physician, who at once diagnosed the philosopher's disorder as trichinosis, but tactfully gave it another name.  "You need an immediate change of diet," he said; "you must eat six ounces of pork every other day."  "Pork?" shrieked the patient--"pork?  Nothing shall induce me to touch it!"  "Do
A peculiarly sharp and specially applied sense of the earth's overpopulation.  Hostility is classified as active and passive; as (respectively) the feeling of a woman for her female friends, and that which she entertains for all the rest of her sex.
A couple in the bed. "Let's do it, goodbye Virginity!" "I'm not sure, what if I get pregnant?" "You won't, I'm sure" "Promise me you won't, John" "I promise, Chris"
Boy: The principal is so dumb! Girl: Do you know who I am? Boy: No... Girl: I am the principal's daughter! Boy: Do you know who I am? Girl: No... Boy: Good! *walks away*
[RACIST] The Parrot A black guy walks into a bar with a beatiful parrot on his shoulder. "Wow," says the bartender. "That is really something. Where'd you get it?" "Africa," says the parrot.
I don't think I could ever fall in love with a midget... I don't think I could ever fall in love with a midget. But I guess it's better to fall in love with a small person, than not a tall.
A reptile with edible legs.  The first mention of frogs in profane literature is in Homer's narrative of the war between them and the mice.  Skeptical persons have doubted Homer's authorship of the work, but the learned, ingenious and industrious Dr. Schliemann has set the question forever at rest by uncovering the bones of the slain frogs.  One of the forms of moral suasion by which Pharaoh was besought to favor the Israelities was a plague
It all makes sense now!! Gay marriage and Pot legalized on the same day... Leviticus 20:13 "If a man lays with another man  he should be stoned." We've just been misinterpreting it all these years!!
Man from Nantucket There once was a man from Nantucket, whose dick was so long he could suck it, he said with a grin, as he wiped off his chin, " if my ear was a cunt, I would fuck it!"
In politics the party that prevents the Government from running amuck by hamstringing it.  The King of Ghargaroo, who had been abroad to study the science of government, appointed one hundred of his fattest subjects as members of a parliament to make laws for the collection of revenue.  Forty of these he named the Party of Opposition and had his Prime Minister carefully instruct them in their duty of opposing every royal measure. Nevertheless, the first one that was submitted passed unanimously. Greatly disple
Socrates famously went around asking questions, but if he'd lived today, he'd be banned from every social media platform for constantly posting "Why do you like this?" under every viral post, effectively trolling the entire internet with his Socratic method.
The same as scarabaeus.  He fell by his own hand Beneath the great oak tree. He'd traveled in a foreign land. He tried to make her understand The dance that's called the Saraband, But he called it Scarabee. He had called it so through an afternoon, And she, the light of his harem if so might be, Had smiled and said naught.  O the body was fair to see, All frosted there in the shine o' the
Step on a crack, break your momma's back! So then I went on a walk with my family. I stepped on a crack, looked at my mom, and said "Why didn't your back break, mom?" "You're adopted."
How do you hide an elephant up a cheery tree? Put it in the tree and paint it's balls red. What's the loudest noise in the world? A giraffe eating cherries Edit: not a cheery tree...cherry
There are four Mexicans, one Chinese person, and three black people standing on your lawn. What do you have? A sprinkler system. Spic, spic, spic, spic, chink! Nigga, nigga, nigga.
Macbeth Joke Lady Macbeth: Out damned spot! The dog named Spot: Ruff ruff ruff. [Exeunt/Leaves] Spot (Aside): Wow, I wonder why she hates me so much? I thought my bark was polite enough!
Boyfriend rushes home: Pack your bag honey, I've won Rs.10 crores in a lottery. Girl Friend: Wow! Dubai or Switzerland? Boyfriend: Who Cares? You just pack your bag &amp; GET LOST!!!
I was in work the other day when a stunning Thai girl walked in. She was gorgeous. all I could think was 'don't get a boner, don't get a boner, don't get a boner.' She *did*.
A QA Engineer walks into a bar an orders a beer. And orders 2 beers, and orders 7445553822 beers, and orders -1 beers, and orders asdfadf beers, and orders Robert'); DROP TABLE beers;
He makes no distinction between innocent and guilty. The babies were innocent, the beasts were innocent, many of the men, many of the women, many of the boys, many of the girls were innocent, yet they had to suffer with the guilty. What the insane Father required was blood and misery; he was indifferent as to who furnished it.
A formal ceremony preliminary to the reconciliation of two enemies.  Great skill is necessary to its satisfactory observance; if awkwardly performed the most unexpected and deplorable consequences sometimes ensue.  A long time ago a man lost his life in a duel.  That dueling's a gentlemanly vice I hold; and wish that it had been my lot To live my life out in some favored spot-- Some country where it is considered nice To split a rival like a fish, or slice A husband like
A motorist was pulled over by a traffic cop. "Excuse me, sir," said the cop. "Do you realize your wife fell out of the car two miles back?" "Thank God," he said. "I thought I'd gone deaf!"
Seasonal Star Wars joke &gt; **Darth Vader**: Luke, I know what you're getting for Christmas. &gt; **Luke**: How? &gt; **Darth Vader**: I felt your presents. EDIT: Formatting
Q: How many Englishmen does it take to screw in  a light bulb? A: What do you mean change it? It's a perfectly good bloody bulb! We have had it for a thousand years and it has worked just *fine*.
A friend of mine asked me, "what rhymes with orange?" I said, "no, it doesn't". *Credit to Jimmy Carr.* **Edit:** ITT: door hinge, syringe, whore binge, Blorenge.
Went to my first fight Club tonight, was so much fun, got there a bit late so I missed the first bit of induction. But wow was it fun! Anyone who is keen or wants to know more, hit me up for details!
"Bro, rumor has it ur dads emo now" "Emo? Nah yo, EMU" "Im confused.." *A massive bird moonwalks in w/ a #1 Dad shirt* "Hi confused, Im Dad"
If Nefertiti owned a topless bar which served tea she could have marketed her business with t-shirts. You could call them 'Nefertiti's titties, tease, teas, and tees.' Edit: better grammar/phrasing.
A despot whom the wise ridicule and obey.  A king there was who lost an eye In some excess of passion; And straight his courtiers all did try To follow the new fashion.  Each dropped one eyelid when before The throne he ventured, thinking 'Twould please the king.  That monarch swore He'd slay them all for winking.  What should they do?  They were not hot To hazard such disaster; They dared not close an eye--dared not See
I was in bed with my boyfriend Ernie last night, and he said to me "Soph, you got no tits and a tight box." I said to him "Ernie get off my back." h/t: Bette Midler
Who were the shortest people in the Bible? Let's see. There's Kneehighmiah, Bildad the Shoe-Height...oh, and Peter, who said, "Silver and gold I have none," and no one could be much shorter than that.
Two muffins are sitting in a hot oven. Two muffins are sitting in a hot over. The first muffin sighs and says, "gosh, it's so hot in here." "The second muffin exclaims, "Ahh, a talking muffin!"
What does a cock and a Rubik's Cube have in common? The more you play with it, the harder it gets. Repost, forgot to proofread "What's does a dick and a Rubiks Cube have in common?" From /r/Jokes
A C-string walks into a bar... A C-string walks into a bar and points to a char next to a float. "Can I join you?" he asks. The float replies "You're not my type" and orders a double.
Guy comes home and says to his wife, "Pack your bags! I just won the lottery!" She jumps for joy and asks, "Where are we going?!?" He says, "I'm not going anywhere. You're outta here!"
Two guys are drinking in a bar... One says to the other, "Did you know that elks have sex 10 to 15 times a day?" "Aww, shit!" says his friend, "and I just joined the Knights of Columbus!"
Afflicting us with greater or less frequency.  That, however, is not the sense in which the word is used in the phrase "occasional verses," which are verses written for an "occasion," such as an anniversary, a celebration or other event.  True, they afflict us a little worse than other sorts of verse, but their name has no reference to irregular recurrence.
Anything assuring protection to one in peril.  Moses and Joshua provided six cities of refuge--Bezer, Golan, Ramoth, Kadesh, Schekem and Hebron--to which one who had taken life inadvertently could flee when hunted by relatives of the deceased.  This admirable expedient supplied him with wholesome exercise and enabled them to enjoy the pleasures of the chase; whereby the soul of the dead man was appropriately honored by observances akin to the funeral games of early Greece.
I got good news and bad news The bad news is there's no good news. The good news is... well I just told you. OR The good news is there's no bad news. The bad news is... well I just told you.
The natural equipment to accomplish some small part of the meaner ambitions distinguishing able men from dead ones.  In the last analysis ability is commonly found to consist mainly in a high degree of solemnity.  Perhaps, however, this impressive quality is rightly appraised; it is no easy task to be solemn.
If you know this one than we are probably friends. * Man 1: Knock Knock. * Man 2: Who's there? * Man 1: KGB. * Man 2: KGB wh- *get's slapped* * Man 1: WE WILL ASK THE QUESTIONS!
[NSFW] Dad, I am a lesbian 1st Daughter:"Dad, I am a lesbian" Dad; "Oh okay!" 2nd Daughter: "I'm a lesbian too..." Dad: "Jesus Christ, does any one in this family love dicks?" Son: "I do."
A black man went into a bank and asked for a job. "You're in luck!" said the manager. $50 thousand a year, and a car!! "You're joking!" said the black man. "Of course I'm joking. But you started it!!"
Man walks into a bar with a giraffe The giraffe goes to sleep on the floor. The bartender says, "Aye, what's that lyin' there?" The man says, "It's not a lion, it's a giraffe!"
The Guyz l Shadowrun Returns l Razor Edge ep 3 l HE'S STILL THERE Hi, I'm Karmit, and I play video games...yeah... Well that's all I can really say. Just want to advertise stuff so...yeah...america...
Blow Bubbles "Hey", I said to my friend. "You ever blow Bubbles?" "Of course I did", he said. "Well," I replied, "I think he must have liked it. He's back in town and asking for you."
I AM THE BOSS, DO NOT FORGET Boss hangs a poster in Office "I AM THE BOSS, DO NOT FORGET" He returns from lunch, finds a slip on his desk. "Ur wife called, she wants her poster back home."
Mrs Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a new scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park every afternoon at 5.30. I am sure she adores scandals, and that the sorrow of her life at present is that she can't manage to have enough of them.
On the bus I was sitting on the bus and this super hot Thai girl gets on and sits next to me I think to myself "Please don't get a boner, please don't get a boner, please don't get a boner" She did.
HI I'M GOING TO HAVE AN UNCOMFORTABLY LOUD YET PRIVATE PHONE CALL ON THIS BUS AND EXHIBIT A STUNNING LACK OF SELF-AWARENESS. THANK YOU.
At School: What Does It Give You? "Kids, what does the chicken give you?" "Meat!" "Very good! Now what does the pig give you?" "Bacon!" "Great! And what does the fat cow give you?" "Homework!"
Natural, inherent--as innate ideas, that is to say, ideas that we are born with, having had them previously imparted to us.  The doctrine of innate ideas is one of the most admirable faiths of philosophy, being itself an innate idea and therefore inaccessible to disproof, though Locke foolishly supposed himself to have given it "a black eye."  Among innate ideas may be mentioned the belief in one's ability to conduct a newspaper, in the greatness of one's country, in the
Married life - Honey, are you jealous? - Nope! - Admit it, you're jealous! - I told you, I am not! - Then give me a kiss! - GO KISS THAT UGLY-ASS WHORE WHO LIKED YOUR FACEBOOK STATUS!
Cop: Hey U! U: who, me? Cop: no the other 1! 1: who, me? Cop: both of U! W: who, us? Cop: Yes you! U: Who, me? Cop: No! No: yes?
A traveler that is taken seriously.  A Pilgrim Father was one who, leaving Europe in 1620 because not permitted to sing psalms through his nose, followed it to Massachusetts, where he could personate God according to the dictates of his conscience.
I just recently bought a used car and I took it back 2 days later. "This car is useless. It doesn't go past 60 up a hill." "60 uphill is really good. What's wrong with that?" "I live at 74."
Three men walk into a bar, what's missing? The joke! Usually one would introduce this one with: "I'm gonna tell you a joke" - but since we are in /r/jokes here, the setup should be ok.
[escorted out of google hq with armful of snakes at 9:02am on my 1st day] WELL MAYBE U SHOULDA CLARIFIED WAT U MEANT BY "PYTHON PROGRAMMER"
Batman's parents....... or not. Guy: Hey, I just saw them. Batman: Who? Guy: Not your parents. Batman: Y U DO THIS??? Guy: Because they told me to. Batman: Who told you to? Guy: Not your parents.
What's the capital of Greece? (x-post from /r/MeanJokes) About 10. DISCLAIMER: I heard this joke from /u/r4e3d2d2i8t5. All due credit to that person.
My To Do List: 1. Buy a flat screen TV. 2. Hang it on a wall. 3. Put a tub of boiling water under the TV 4. Watch "The Ring" and see tht bitch fall when she crawls outta my TV.
A guy goes to a $5 lady of the night... ... and he gets crabs. So the next day, he goes back to complain. And the woman says, "Hey, it was only $5. What did you expect, lobster?"
Cheese &amp; Milk Just as I was getting home last night a guy hit me with a block of cheese. I thought that wasn't very mature. He then ran over and pour milk all over my head. I thought HOW DAIRY!!!
A day in the life of a dick A dick has a sad life. His hair is a mess, his family is nuts, his next door neighbor is an asshole, his best friend is a pussy and his owner beats him on a daily basis.
A man goes to see his doctor... A man goes to the doctor and the doctor says "I'm afraid you're going to have to stop masturbating." The man says "What! why?" The doctor says "So I can examine you"
Visiting dad on his death bed... [Visiting father on death bed] "Dad, I'm sorry for the pain I caused you. " *Dad struggling to talk* "Hi sorry for the pain I caused you, I'm Dad."
Two cops knocked on my door Me: What do you want? Cops: We just want to talk. Me: How many of you are out there? Cops: There's two of us. Me: So why don't you talk with each other?
What was the victim of the car crash wearing? A Casualty (Casual-Tee, as in Tee-Shirt) 100% Guraneed Originality You can know for sure I made it up because of how corny it is...
A bondman's change from the tyranny of another to the despotism of himself.  He was a slave:  at word he went and came; His iron collar cut him to the bone. Then Liberty erased his owner's name, Tightened the rivets and inscribed his own.  G.J.   EMBALM, v.i.  To cheat vegetation by locking up the gases upon which it feeds.  By embalming their dead and thereby deranging
A man goes to the vet about his dog's fleas. The vet says: 'I'm sorry, I'll have to put this dog down.' The man is incredulous and asks why. The vet says: 'Because he's far too heavy.'
[Starbucks] ME: [bursts in] THERE'S A GUNMAN AT LARGE BARISTA: [shrugs] ME: [sigh] THERE'S A GUNMAN AT VENTI B: *grande screaming noises*
Priests and ministers of an ancient Celtic religion which did not disdain to employ the humble allurement of human sacrifice. Very little is now known about the Druids and their faith.  Pliny says their religion, originating in Britain, spread eastward as far as Persia.  Caesar says those who desired to study its mysteries went to Britain.  Caesar himself went to Britain, but does not appear to have obtained any high preferment in the Druidical Church, although his talent for human sacrifice
A demon addicted to the reprehensible habit of devouring the dead.  The existence of ghouls has been disputed by that class of controversialists who are more concerned to deprive the world of comforting beliefs than to give it anything good in their place.  In 1640 Father Secchi saw one in a cemetery near Florence and frightened it away with the sign of the cross.  He describes it as gifted with many heads and an uncommon allowance of limbs, and he saw it in more than one place
From time to time, as I go along, I will take up a Biblical statute and show you that it always violates a law of God, and then is imported into the lawbooks of the nations, where it continues its violations. But those things will keep; there is no hurry.
A short story padded.  A species of composition bearing the same relation to literature that the panorama bears to art.  As it is too long to be read at a sitting the impressions made by its successive parts are successively effaced, as in the panorama.  Unity, totality of effect, is impossible; for besides the few pages last read all that is carried in mind is the mere plot of what has gone before. To the romance the novel is what photography is to painting.
One of a tribe of very small men found by ancient travelers in many parts of the world, but by modern in Central Africa only.  The Pigmies are so called to distinguish them from the bulkier Caucasians --who are Hogmies.
What is an out of date joke you still remember? One from the 90's: What do you call a little burro? A Burrito. What do you call a little taco? A Taquito What do you call a little judge? A Judge Ito
A man who piously shuts himself up to meditate upon the sin of wickedness; and to keep it fresh in his mind joins a brotherhood of awful examples.  O Coenobite, O coenobite, Monastical gregarian, You differ from the anchorite, That solitudinarian: With vollied prayers you wound Old Nick; With dropping shots he makes him sick.  Quincy Giles
A 40 year-old man is walking into some dark woods with an 8 year-old girl... ...the girl says, "These woods are scary!" The man says, "How do you think I feel? I have to walk out all by myself!"
From cradle to grave these enemies are always at work; they know no rest, night or day. They are an army: an organized army; a besieging army; an assaulting army; an army that is alert, watchful, eager, merciless; an army that never relents, never grants a truce.
Some years ago people went about the country saying that property has duties. It is perfectly true. Property not merely has duties, but has so many duties that its possession to any large extent is a bore. If property had simply pleasures we could stand it, but its duties make it unbearable.
His heaven is like himself: strange, interesting, astonishing, grotesque. I give you my word, it has not a single feature in it that he actually values. It consists -- utterly and entirely -- of diversions which he cares next to nothing about, here in the earth, yet is quite sure he will like them in heaven. Isn't it curious? Isn't it interesting? You must not think I am exaggerating, for it is not so. I will give you details.
I ordered a Pizza the other day, When she read the order back to me she said, "So, you have one thick sausage, anything else? I looked her dead in the eye and replied, "Yes, I also ordered a pizza."
A woman is at her father's deathbed She hasn't seen him in years and now they only have a few moments left. "Dad, I'm sorry," she whispers. "Goodbye, Sorry," he says, "I'm *dead*."
my nana and bb8 i recently got the sphero bb8 and my nana asked 'what is that' 'its bb8' 'who?' 'a robot from star wars' 'oh, so is there a mouse in side it?'
My mom said that if I don't get off my computer and do my homework she'll slam my head on the keyboard, but I think she's jokinfjreoiwjrtwe4to8rkljreun8f4ny84c8y4t58lym4wthylmhawt4mylt4amlathnatyn
Customer asking Bin Laden in Bar ( i need /u/yourjokeexplainedhere Customer: "I'll have a Bin Laden, please." Barman: "Sir, what is dat?" Customer: "Two shots and a splash of water."
This "excommunication" is a word In speech ecclesiastical oft heard, And means the damning, with bell, book and candle, Some sinner whose opinions are a scandal-- A rite permitting Satan to enslave him Forever, and forbidding Christ to save him.  Gat Huckle
A writer who guesses his way to the truth and dispels it with a tempest of words.  "More dear than all my bosom knows, O thou Whose 'lips are sealed' and will not disavow!" So sang the blithe reporter-man as grew Beneath his hand the leg-long "interview."  Barson Maith   REPOSE, v.i.  To cease from troubling.
A large red organ thoughtfully provided by nature to be bilious with.  The sentiments and emotions which every literary anatomist now knows to haunt the heart were anciently believed to infest the liver; and even Gascoygne, speaking of the emotional side of human nature, calls it "our hepaticall parte."  It was at one time considered the seat of life; hence its name--liver, the thing we live with.  The liver is heaven
One of the opposing, or unfair, sex.  The Maker, at Creation's birth, With living things had stocked the earth. From elephants to bats and snails, They all were good, for all were males. But when the Devil came and saw He said:  "By Thine eternal law Of growth, maturity, decay, These all must quickly pass away And leave untenanted the earth Unless Thou dost establish birth"-- Then tucked his head beneath his wing To laugh--
Uncommon extension of the fear of death.  LOOKING-GLASS, n.  A vitreous plane upon which to display a fleeting show for man's disillusion given.  The King of Manchuria had a magic looking-glass, whereon whoso looked saw, not his own image, but only that of the king.  A certain courtier who had long enjoyed the king's favor and was thereby enriched beyond any other subject of the realm, said to the king: "
double midget jokes god save me When to know to kick a midget's balls? Ans - When he's next to your girlfriend and he says "Her hair smells nice." What do you call a midget vampire? Ans - Cocksucker.
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ A gift for all redditors. It's called The Alphabet. You can use as much of it as you want, as many times as you want so that you will write in complete fucking sentenc
The lower world; the residence of departed spirits; the place where the dead live.  Among the ancients the idea of Hades was not synonymous with our Hell, many of the most respectable men of antiquity residing there in a very comfortable kind of way.  Indeed, the Elysian Fields themselves were a part of Hades, though they have since been removed to Paris. When the Jacobean version of the New Testament was in process of evolution the pious and learned men engaged in the work insisted by
MOTHRA: try this, its crunchy & juicy GODZILA: i cant, im on a...low-car diet MOTHRA: o ha ha like low-carb GODZILA: ha ha HUMANS IN CAR: AHHH
Wanna hear a joke?? Okay here goes, My ex-wife still misses me! BUT HE AIM IS GETTING BETTER! HER AIM IS GETTING BETTER! You see it's funny because marriage is terrible.-Stanley pines 2012
So a cop pulled me over one day for speeding... he asked: "excuse me sir, but do you know how long i've been waiting for you?" i said:" i know, i'm sorry but i tried to get here as fast as i could."
Oldie - -Communist China telegrams Soviet Russia Communist China: WE ARE OUT OF FOOD. SEND GRAIN Soviet reply: WE ARE ALSO OUT OF FOOD. TIGHTEN YOUR BELTS Communist China: SEND BELTS
What do you call a blind deer? No eye-deer. What do you call a blind, dickless deer? No fucking eye-deer. What do you call a blind, dickless, quadruple amputee deer? Still no fucking eye-dear.
An asian man goes to the eye doctor... The doctor says to him "I know why you're not seeing so well, you have a cataract" The asian man says "No, I have a Rincoln Contirental"
A roman centurion walks into a bar and orders a martinus. The barkeeper looks at him and says "mate, don't you mean a martini?" The centurio answers "if i wanted a double i would've ordered it!"
My dad everyone... Dad: U at home? Me: No. Dad: Where? Me: Hairdresser. Dad: Aaahhh. They putting pants an blouse on ur hair ? Get it. Hair dresser. Lol Ugh.
I went to the local swimming pool today... And I asked the receptionist, "How much for 2 children?" She replied, "$9.50." "Awesome!" I said. "Do I get to choose or is it a lucky dip?"
To me the word 'natural' means all that is middle class, all that is of the essence of Jingoism, all that is colourless and without form and void. It might be a beautiful word, but it is the most debased coin in the currency of language.
Funny one liner:what is mean by Assasination There is a girl in my office.she has a kickass ass. she kills me with her ass...hope now u know,how the word 'Assasination' came into existence..
Arnold Swarzeneggar pushup contest. Arnold Swarzeneggar challenged former President George W. Bush to a pushup contest, and the President accepted. Swarzeneggar did 910, But Bush did 911.
THERE IS A VIRUS GOING AROUND REDDIT W THE LINK "CO-EDS.AVI" THAT MAKES YOU TYPE IN ALL CAPS I DIDNT CLICK ON IT BC I DONT WATCH PORN BUT BE ON THE LOOK OUT..
What did Bernie Sanders say when he found a dead body at a Democratic Party meeting to select candidates and decide policy? "Oh god, a caucus!" ^^^cuz ^^^he ^^^has ^^^a ^^^new ^^^england ^^^accent
(1:35pm) God: Yo Abraham (1:37pm) Abe: sup (1:38pm) God: Need u to kill ur son (1:42pm) Abe: k (4:02pm) God: jk lol (4:10pm) God: u there?
A couple of obducents stood at the bar talking. -You Should have seen the other day. I had a beautiful lady come in and her clitoris was like a pickled cucumber. -Wow! So big? No, so salty!
A German woman was walking down a dark alley when she got accosted by eleven men... ...who tear her clothes apart and start to rape and molest her. The woman shouts 'Nien! Nien!', so two of them left.
For not only was a sample of man to be saved, but business samples of the other animals, too. You must understand that when Adam ate the apple in the Garden and learned how to multiply and replenish, the other animals learned the Art, too, by watching Adam. It was cunning of them, it was neat; for they got all that was worth having out of the apple without tasting it and afflicting themselves with the disastrous Moral Sense, the parent of all immoralities.
Overheard a phone conversation today **Father** - "What has a small dick and hangs down? **Son** - "What?" **Father** - "A bat. What has a big dick and hangs up?" **Son** - "What?" "click"
a girl to her mother: Mom! I was stopped at a red light and got hit by a car! --oh no! who rear-ended you? lots of guys, mom! But can we go back to talking about my accident please?
Hooker to customer: "I will do anything for you for $500". Customer says incredulously: "ANYTHING?" Hooker: "Sure" Customer: "Meet me at my house on Friday, I want you to -" "paint my house."
How is Chick-Fil-A like a black hole? You can come in, but you can't come out. &lt;editorial non-joke remark - I'm straight, but these guys need to learn a lesson IMHO&gt;
How to catch a polar bear: 1) Cut a hole in the ice. 2) Carefully place peas in a circle around the hole. 3) Hide and wait. 4) When the polar bear comes to take a pea, you kick him in the ice-hole.
A programmer goes to do groceries. His wife tell him: -- Buy a loaf of bread, and if they have eggs, buy a dozen. He comes back with thirteen loaves of bread. -- But why?, she asks. -- They had eggs.
A dog says to the other, "Woof!" The other replies, "Moo!" The first dog is perplexed. He says, "Moo? Why did you say, Moo?'" The other dog answers, "I'm trying to learn a foreign language."
Spell roast five times, r-o-a-s-t, r-o-a-s-t, r-o-a-s-t, r-o-a-s-t, r-o-a-s-t. What do you put in a toaster? I usually put bread in a toaster.
ALIEN:*points at Chihuahua* whats that? ME: a dog ALIEN:*points at Husky* whats that? ME: dog ALIEN:*getting angry, points at Pug* whats THA
" Could you explain to me why I woke up this morning with a cucumber up my ass? " My wife screamed. " Could you explain to me," I yelled back, " Why you didn't wake up when I put it there? "
A patriotic Helen Keller song... "Helen Keller went to town, riding on a pony, stuck a feather in her hat and called it 'Maughhghariianoo oohhghhoo onooa oooaughhahg'."
It was the Father that inflicted this ferocious and undeserved punishment upon those bereaved and friendless virgins, whose parents and kindred he had slaughtered before their eyes. And were they praying to him for pity and rescue, meantime? Without a doubt of it.
A particular type of disappointment.  By the kind of intelligence that sees in an exception a proof of the rule the wisdom of an act is judged by the outcome, the result.  This is immortal nonsense; the wisdom of an act is to be judged by the light that the doer had when he performed it.
An angry teenager from a Catholic home began dressing as a monk to mock his parents' faith. When asked by a friend how her son had been, the boy's mother replied, "Well, he's been-a-dick-teen lately."
A temporary insanity curable by marriage or by removal of the patient from the influences under which he incurred the disorder. This disease, like _caries_ and many other ailments, is prevalent only among civilized races living under artificial conditions; barbarous nations breathing pure air and eating simple food enjoy immunity from its ravages.  It is sometimes fatal, but more frequently to the physician than to the patient.  LOW-BRED, adj.  "Raised" instead of brought up.
[Spelling bee] Your word is Monogamous. M-O-N-O-T-O-N-O-U-S *2 Judges stare at each other* 1st judge *nods* 2nd judge: "We'll allow it"
I'm such an introvert. #Introvert #Introverted #TeamIntroverted #Shy #SoShy #2Shy #2Shy2Talk2You #ShyBoy #Blushes #NoEyeContact #SoftTalker
Van Gogh's girlfriend.. Van Gogh's girlfriend was overwhelmed with emotion when he cut off his ear and gave it to her. She said, "Oh my love, why did you do it?" Van Gogh replied, "pardon?"
Beware of Lawyers 7 "Are!you!a!lawyer?" "Yes." "How!much!do!you!charge?" "A!hundred!dollars!for!four!questions." "Isn't!that!awfully!expensive?" "Yes.!What!is!your!fourth!question?"
Man--poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man--belongs to a sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years. He can't help himself; it is in his race. The history of women is very different. They have always been picturesque protests against the mere existence of common-sense; they saw its dangers from the first.
"Lie flat on your backs class and circle  your feet in the air as if you were riding your bikes" said the gym  teacher. "Fred! What are you doing? Move your feet boy."  "I'm freewheeling sir."
A German airman on the air forces during WW2 If you see a white plane, it's American; if it's black it's RAF (Royal Air Force). If you see no planes at all, that's the Luftwaffe.
Lol "I'm not a pervert, I'm just a connoisseur of ass and titties." My response after a female co-worker called me a pervert for commenting on a customer's ass as she walked past us.
Nature is no great mother who has home us. She is our own creation. It is in our brain that she quickens to life. Things are because we see them, and what we see and how we see it depends on the arts that have influenced us. To look at a thing is very different from seeing a thing. One does not see anything until one sees its beauty.
Back in the day, I took $5 to the store and came out with.. 3 bags of chips, a pack of snickers, 2 bottles of coke, a newspaper and a bottle of whisky. And today? CCTVs everywhere!
A member of the reigning dynasty in letters and life. The Dullards came in with Adam, and being both numerous and sturdy have overrun the habitable world.  The secret of their power is their insensibility to blows; tickle them with a bludgeon and they laugh with a platitude.  The Dullards came originally from Boeotia, whence they were driven by stress of starvation, their dullness having blighted the crops.  For some centuries they infested Philistia
A wolf that was once, or is sometimes, a man.  All werewolves are of evil disposition, having assumed a bestial form to gratify a beastial appetite, but some, transformed by sorcery, are as humane as is consistent with an acquired taste for human flesh.  Some Bavarian peasants having caught a wolf one evening, tied it to a post by the tail and went to bed.  The next morning nothing was there!  Greatly perplexed, they consulted the local
In the Ojibwa tongue, disaster; an unexpected affliction that strikes hard.  Should you ask me whence this laughter, Whence this audible big-smiling, With its labial extension, With its maxillar distortion And its diaphragmic rhythmus Like the billowing of an ocean, Like the shaking of a carpet, I should answer, I should tell you: From the great deeps of the spirit, From the unplummeted abysmus Of
Very well, six thousand years ago Shem was full of hookworms. Microscopic in size, invisible to the unaided eye. All of the Creator's specially deadly disease-producers are invisible. It is an ingenious idea. For thousands of years it kept man from getting at the roots of his maladies, and defeated his attempts to master them. It is only very recently that science has succeeded in exposing some of these treacheries.
So I walked into the pharmacy the other day... because I needed to grab some condoms. As I was checking out, the clerk asked, "do you need a bag for that?" I replied, "Nah, she's not that ugly."
So a silver mine collapsed in Germany... So a silver mine collapsed in Germany, I guess you could say that's one mein fuhrer. I don't know if that exists or not, but as far as I know, I made that up.
It's official. The winner of the biggest upset in US presidential history is T-R-U-M- A-N. 1948. HUGE upset. Edit 3:30AM ET: this was a *lot* funnier when it was true.
The one infallible sign of civilization and enlightenment. A people with no sauces has one thousand vices; a people with one sauce has only nine hundred and ninety-nine.  For every sauce invented and accepted a vice is renounced and forgiven.
Like a simple American citizen beduking himself in his lodge, or affirming his consequence in the Scheme of Things as an elemental unit of a parade.  The Knights of Dominion were so resplendent in their velvet- and-gold that their masters would hardly have known them.  "Chronicles of the Classes"   RESPOND, v.i.  To make answer, or disclose otherwise a consciousness of having inspired an interest in what Herbert Spencer calls "external coexist
Why didn't Ronda go to Prom? she got Holm schooled &amp;nbsp; &amp;nbsp; &amp;nbsp; [/r/funny told me to go here &gt;.&gt;]
What does a pizza boy and a gynecologist have in common? They both can smell it, but not eat it. Yes I know it's a repost. What did you expect, a new original joke every time? Now that's a joke.
Ricky sent SMS to his BOSS: "Me sick, no work" Boss SMS back: "When I am sick I kiss my wife try it" 2 hours later Ricky sms 2 boss: "Me ok, ur wife very sweet"
I tried mugging an old aged pensioner yesterday. I said, "Give me all your money now, bitch, or you're geography." "Don't you mean history?" she replied. I said, "Don't try to change the subject."
My wife texted me at lunch "Window's frozen" "Pour warm water on it, then lightly tap the edges with a hammer and chisel" I replied. Ten minutes later, she called back. "We need a new computer now".
That part of Eternity with some small fraction of which we have a slight and regrettable acquaintance.  A moving line called the Present parts it from an imaginary period known as the Future.  These two grand divisions of Eternity, of which the one is continually effacing the other, are entirely unlike.  The one is dark with sorrow and disappointment, the other bright with prosperity and joy.  The Past is the region of sobs, the Future is the realm of song.  In the one
Two atoms walked out of a bar. One turned to the other one and said, "we've got to go back in there, I left an electron" The other one asked, "Are you sure?" He replied, "Yes, I'm positive"
Cop: FREEZE, DON'T MOVE!!! Me: *stops moving* Cop: GET DOWN ON THE GROUND Me:... Cop: NOW! Me:... Me:... Cop: for the love of god...unfreeze
Star Wars meat joke As seen in the Death Star II cafeteria: "For those of you finding the Wookiee steaks a bit too Chewy, try our new Ewok Chops: Guaranteed to be more on the Endor side."
He took me from a bar. He took me in his car....... He took me from a bar. He took me in his car. He took my top off. He puts his lips on mine, but don't worry: I'm a bottle of wine!
Where's the 'Alpha male' bint putting out a video that becomes famous for the line "LEAVE JEREMY (Clarkson) ALONE!"?... In written form on every comment thread of every relative social media post.
'Know thyself' was written over the portal of the antique world. Over the portal of the new world 'Be thyself' shall be written. And the message of Christ to man was simply: 'Be thyself.' That is the secret of Christ.
Boy 1: "How did you get that bruise on your arm?" Boy 2: "I ate some Easter candy." Boy 1: "Eating Easter candy won't give you a bruise." Boy 2: "It will if it's your big brother's candy!"
[spelling bee] Your word is "spider" Can you use it in a sentence? "A spider has eight eyes." [kid smiles] Spider. S-P-I-I-I-I-I-I-I-I-D-E-R
A Wookie, a Stormtrooper, and Boba Fett walk in to a bar. They sit down and Boba Fett turns to the trooper and says, "I think that was the first time one of you guys actually hit something."
There are 10 types of people Those who don't understand Binary, and 01110100 01101000 01101111 01110011 01100101 00100000 01110111 01101000 01101111 00100000 01100100 01101111 00101110
A mama's boy is frantically running out of a strip club yelling... MY MOMMA TOLD ME IF I EVER CAME INTO A PLACE LIKE THIS I'D TURN INTO STONE. AND I FEEL IT'S STARTING
SPELLING BEE: spell "configurable" ME: C-O-N-F-I-G-U-R-A-B-- SPELLING BEE: (interupting) yes i am a bee but i fail to see why thats relevant
20 blind men walk into a bar *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud* *thud*
The branch of a tree or the leg of an American woman.  'Twas a pair of boots that the lady bought, And the salesman laced them tight To a very remarkable height-- Higher, indeed, than I think he ought-- Higher than _can_ be right. For the Bible declares--but never mind: It is hardly fit To censure freely and fault to find With others for sins that I'm not inclined Myself to commit. Each has his weakness, and though my own
To apply for a pet license, you must prove your pet understands and agrees to the terms of the city's animal conduct code. The paperwork includes a paw print signature, which is hard to get when your cat is more interested in shredding the document than signing it.
5: "Mommy why not?" Me: "Because you're driving me crazy." 5: "How?" 5: "How?" 5: "How?" 5: "How?" 5: "How?" 5: "How?" 5: "How?" 5: "How?"
A newly wedded desperate soldier .. A newly wedded desperate soldier sends a hand-grenade to his mother-in-law, with a note: Dearest Mom, If you pull this ring, I'll be able to get 3 days leave. :P
Dirty funny What do you get when there are two nuts on a wall? Walnuts. What do you get with two nuts on your chest? Chestnuts. What do you get with two nuts on your chin? A Dick in your mouth.
How to serve someone a summons to court 1) Knock on their door 2) Holding a really big check for $1,000,000 3) With a "camera crew" 4) Verify person's name 5) JK you've been served.
In popular usage to pierce with any weapon which remains fixed in the wound.  This, however, is inaccurate; to impale is, properly, to put to death by thrusting an upright sharp stake into the body, the victim being left in a sitting position.  This was a common mode of punishment among many of the nations of antiquity, and is still in high favor in China and other parts of Asia.  Down to the beginning of the fifteenth century it was widely employed in
Minnie Mouse comes home to Mickey and tells him she wants to get a divorce Mickey: "What? Think of what this will do to the ratings! Are you fucking crazy!?" Minnie: "No dear, I'm fucking Goofy"
A wig walks into a bar. A wig walks into a bar and asks the bartender for a pint. Bartender replies "No way man!" Wig "Why not?" Bartender "Have you seen yourself? You're off your head!" ;D
K1: Frankincence K2: Myrrh K3: Gold K1 & K2: WHAT? K3: Gold K1: We said 20 each! K3: I.. K1: I hate you K3: Wrap it from all of us?
A man runs into a bar... A man runs into a bar, and demands to the barkeep: "Quick! How tall do penguins grow?" "About two foot sir" replies the bartender "Shit. I've just run over a nun."
PMS: I'm sorry. ME: Why? It's a good day. PMS: Wait for it. ME: [2 secs later] DID MY PARENTS REALLY TAKE MY DOG TO A FARM WHEN I WAS 5?!
It is sometimes said that the tragedy of an artist's life is that he cannot realise his ideal. But the true tragedy that dogs the steps of most artists is that they realise their ideal too absolutely. For when the ideal is realised it is robbed of its wonder and its mystery, and becomes simply a new starting-point for an ideal that is other than itself.
The state and title of a king.  Regarded with a just contempt by the Most Eminent Grand Masters, Grand Chancellors, Great Incohonees and Imperial Potentates of the ancient and honorable orders of republican America.
Out on a blind date. I told her, being funny is the 2nd best way to get a girl into bed. She said "What's the best way?" I said "A big knife" She laughed and said "You're funny" I said "wise choice"
A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures. But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating. The worse their rhymes are the more picturesque they look. The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible. He lives the poetry that he cannot write. The others write the poetry that they dare not realise.
The father of a most respectable family, comprising Enthusiasm, Affection, Self-denial, Faith, Hope, Charity and many other goodly sons and daughters.  All hail, Delusion!  Were it not for thee The world turned topsy-turvy we should see; For Vice, respectable with cleanly fancies, Would fly abandoned Virtue's gross advances.  Mumfrey Mappel
An Trainer talks to one of his Novice Doctor... 'I cannot wait to do this operation!' 'And why is that?' 'If I could not wait to do this operation,I would be no doctor... **'I WOULD BE PATIENT!'**
In the latest team-building exercise titled "Synergy Sprint", employees were blindfolded and asked to navigate a maze while holding hands. The twist? The maze was just the office layout, proving that teamwork is about not leading your colleagues into the coffee machine.
Adam and Eve ate the forbidden fruit, and at once a great light streamed into their dim heads. They had acquired knowledge. What knowledge -- useful knowledge? No -- merely knowledge that there was such a thing as good, and such a thing as evil, and how to do evil. they couldn't do it before. Therefore all their acts up to this time had been without stain, without blame, without offense.
What did you have for breakfast? Pea Soup Q: What did you have for lunch? A: Pea Soup Q: What did you have for dinner? A: Pea Soup Q: What did you do all night? A: Pee soup...
A guy gets pulled over for speeding The cops walks up to the guy's car window and says "Son, I've been here just a waitin' for you all day." The guy replies "Well, I got here as fast as I could".
I need to know your best 'Yo Mama' Joke. I just got schooled in a Yo mama rank fest(Yes i'm 39, so what) and I need some serious ammo to get back at this ass. Thank you all.
Teacher and John Teacher: John. Give me a sentence beginning with "I". Paul: I is the... Teacher: No, John . You must say "I am" not "I is." John: All right. I am the ninth letter of the alphabet.
Two priests in a car... ... as a cop pulls them over. "Sir, we are looking for two child molesters..." The priests look at each other and after a short moment the driver says: "Okay, we'll do it"
Mean Mom My mom was very mean. She would always complain to me "why can't you be like your cousin Jeffrey, WHY CAN'T YOU BE LIKE YOUR COUSIN JEFFREY!" ...My cousin Jeffrey died at birth.
One who ventures to believe that Adam need not have sinned unless he had a mind to--in opposition to the Supralapsarians, who hold that that luckless person's fall was decreed from the beginning.  Infralapsarians are sometimes called Sublapsarians without material effect upon the importance and lucidity of their views about Adam.  Two theologues once, as they wended their way To chapel, engaged in colloquial fray-- An earnest logomachy, bitter
This word has no definition.  Its origin is related as follows by the ingenious Father Gassalasca Jape, S.J.  One day a wag--what would the wretch be at?-- Shifted a letter of the cipher RAT, And said it was a god's name!  Straight arose Fantastic priests and postulants (with shows, And mysteries, and mummeries, and hymns, And disputations dire that lamed their limbs)
A solemn religious ceremony to which several degrees of authority and significance are attached.  Rome has seven sacraments, but the Protestant churches, being less prosperous, feel that they can afford only two, and these of inferior sanctity.  Some of the smaller sects have no sacraments at all--for which mean economy they will indubitable be damned.
Thor, upon his mighty steed, approaches his enemy, Thanos. Thanos asks "Who might you be?" "I AM THORRRR!!!" His horse perks up and says "Well, then wear a thaddle thilly."
Walnut: I look exactly like a brain. Broccoli: Hey, I look like a tree. Mushroom: Wow, I look just like an umbrella. Walnut: I look exactly like a brain. Banana: Man, can we change the topic please?
The faculty that distinguishes a weak animal or person from a strong one.  It brings its possessor much mental satisfaction and great material adversity.  An Italian proverb says:  "The furrier gets the skins of more foxes than asses."
If we live for aims we blunt our emotions. If we live for aims we live for one minute, for one day, for one year, instead of for every minute, every day, every year. The moods of one's life are life's beauties. To yield to all one's moods is to really live.
A bird that supplies quills for writing.  These, by some occult process of nature, are penetrated and suffused with various degrees of the bird's intellectual energies and emotional character, so that when inked and drawn mechanically across paper by a person called an "author," there results a very fair and accurate transcript of the fowl's thought and feeling.  The difference in geese, as discovered by this ingenious method, is considerable:  many are found to have only trivial and insignificant powers
DON'T QUESTION YOUR DOCTOR A man went to see his doctor. "You need to stop masturbating," the doctor told him. The man asked, "Why?" The doctor replied, "Because I'm trying to examine you!"
Society is a necessary thing. No man has any real success in this world unless he has got women to back him--and women rule society. If you have not got women on your side you are quite over. You might just as well be a barrister or a stockbroker or a journalist at once.
Love art for its own sake and then all things that you need will be added to you. This devotion to beauty and to the creation of beautiful things is the test of all great civilisations; it is what makes the life of each citizen a sacrament and not a speculation.
"Uh huh, uh huh, uh huh, uh huh, uh huh, uh huh, uh huh, yep, yep, uh huh, uh huh, ok, you too, bye": Man side of every phone conversation with his wife.
A man injures his hand and visits his doctor... "Doc, will I be able to play the piano now?" "Of course! This won't stop a thing." "That's good, because I couldn't play worth a damn before!"
Peculiarly exposed to the tooth of detraction; vilifed; hopelessly in the wrong; superseded in the consideration and affection of another.  To men a man is but a mind.  Who cares What face he carries or what form he wears? But woman's body is the woman.  O, Stay thou, my sweetheart, and do never go, But heed the warning words the sage hath said: A woman absent is a woman dead.  Jogo
"See," cries the chorus of admiring preachers, "How Providence provides for all His creatures!" "His care," the gnat said, "even the insects follows: For us He has provided wrens and swallows."  Sempen Railey
A person who boasts himself hard to please because nobody tries to please him.  There is a land of pure delight, Beyond the Jordan's flood, Where saints, apparelled all in white, Fling back the critic's mud.  And as he legs it through the skies, His pelt a sable hue, He sorrows sore to recognize The missiles that he threw.  Orrin Goof
22,110! 22,109! 22,108! 22,107! 22,106! 22,105! 22,104! 22,103! 22,102! 22,101! 22,100! 22,099! 22,098! 22,097! 22,096! 22,095! 22,094!
So, I got a card from a friend that said "I'm Sorry". It was all handcrafted and I didn't know what it was for, but I was flattered. I opened it and it said "For fucking your mom" :0 WTF!?!?!?
10 qualities of a perfect girlfriend: 1. Truthful 2. Intelligent 3. Gentle 4. Humble 5. Tolerant 6. Polite 7. Understanding 8. Sexy 9. Smart 10. Young In short:- T.I.G.H.T.P.U.S.S.Y
A deer, a skunk, and a duck went to the grocery store. When they were ready to check out, the deer didn't have a buck, the skunk didn't have a scent, so they put it all on the duck's bill.
A 5-year old boy approaches his father saying, "Dad, I know the woman I want to marry." "Oh yeah, who is it?" He replies, "Grandmaw." "You can't marry my mother!" "Why not? YOU MARRIED MINE!"
An old man says to the doctor "I piss like a horse at 6 each morning, poop like a goose at 7." The doctor says "Then what's the problem?" The old man says "I don't get out of bed until 8."
so a man answers a phone call... man - "I don't know, I live about ten miles from the ocean" wife - "who was that? what did they want?" man - "some asshole who wanted to know if the coast was clear"
I hate when a texting convo goes like this You: heyy. Them: hey! You: watzup? Them: nothin wbu? You: same. Them: cool.  You: yea Them: haha. You: lol. Them: yep.
NSFW - Want to hear a dirty Joke? The white horse rolled in the mud. Hiyo. Try the salisbury steak I'll be here all week. (I know its an old one, but it always made me laugh)
Honey, I have good news and bad news. The bad news is that the penguin pooped in the bathtub. Wife: "But we don't *have* a penguin!" Me: "And now for the good news...!"
A gift from Heaven signifying, "This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased."  John D. Rockefeller   The reward of toil and virtue.  J.P. Morgan   The savings of many in the hands of one.  Eugene Debs  To these excellent definitions the inspired lexicographer feels that he can add nothing of value.
Our latest initiative, 'Work-Life Balance 2.0', encourages employees to sleep at their desks so they don't waste time commuting. This innovative approach will help maximize productivity while reducing the carbon footprint from travel. Oh, and don't forget, pajamas are now part of the new business casual dress code.
In the final analysis, why did Yu do better than Hu? Hu died and left Yu king. Wait a minute - how can you so sure about what's after death? Who died and left you king? Isn't that what I just said?
Two whales are swimming in the ocean. One whale opens his mouth and says "BEEEEEOOOOOOUUUUUUUGAA BOOOOOOUUUUAAAAAAAAEEEOOOOH" The other whale turns to him and says "Dude you are so drunk."
A girl has taking home a very handsome guy... ... to spend the night. When he unzips she bursts out: - "Oh! I've never been with a circumcised guy before" - "I'm not. This is just wear n' tear"
Nothing could be more characteristic of him. He created all those infamous people, and he alone was responsible for their conduct. Not one of them deserved death, yet it was certainly good policy to extinguish them; especially since in creating them the master crime had already been committed, and to allow them to go on procreating would be a distinct addition to the crime. But at the same time there could be no justice, no fairness, in any favoritism -- all should be drowned or none.
FUN FACT: If every human on Earth was laid out end to end... ...there would be no one left to measure how far it went. &amp;nbsp; ^^credit ^^to ^^@meganamram ^^on ^^Twitter
Lost my watch at a party... Saw a guy stepping on it while sexually harassing a girl. I walked up to the dude, punched him straight in the nose. No one does that to a girl. ^not ^^on ^^^my ^^^^watch.
Helen: Mum do you know what I'm going to  give you for your birthday? Mum: No dear what ? Helen: A nice teapot. Mum: But I've got a nice teapot. Helen: No you haven't. I've just dropped it.