An act whereby a sovereign attests his sense of the high temperature of the throne.  Poor Isabella's dead, whose abdication Set all tongues wagging in the Spanish nation. For that performance 'twere unfair to scold her: She wisely left a throne too hot to hold her. To History she'll be no royal riddle-- Merely a plain parched pea that jumped the griddle.  G.J.  
The temple of the god Stomach, in whose worship, with sacrificial rights, all true men engage.  From women this ancient faith commands but a stammering assent.  They sometimes minister at the altar in a half-hearted and ineffective way, but true reverence for the one deity that men really adore they know not.  If woman had a free hand in the world's marketing the race would become graminivorous. 
The natural equipment to accomplish some small part of the meaner ambitions distinguishing able men from dead ones.  In the last analysis ability is commonly found to consist mainly in a high degree of solemnity.  Perhaps, however, this impressive quality is rightly appraised; it is no easy task to be solemn. 
Not conforming to standard. In matters of thought and conduct, to be independent is to be abnormal, to be abnormal is to be detested. Wherefore the lexicographer adviseth a striving toward the straiter resemblance of the Average Man than he hath to himself. Whoso attaineth thereto shall have peace, the prospect of death and the hope of Hell. 
Persons of little worth found cumbering the soil of a newly discovered country.  They soon cease to cumber; they fertilize.  ABRACADABRA.  By _Abracadabra_ we signify An infinite number of things. 'Tis the answer to What? and How? and Why? And Whence? and Whither?--a word whereby The Truth (with the comfort it brings) Is open to all who grope in night,
To shorten.  When in the course of human events it becomes necessary for people to abridge their king, a decent respect for the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.  Oliver Cromwell  
Sudden, without ceremony, like the arrival of a cannon- shot and the departure of the soldier whose interests are most affected by it.  Dr. Samuel Johnson beautifully said of another author's ideas that they were "concatenated without abruption."  ABSCOND, v.i.  To "move in a mysterious way," commonly with the property of another.  Spring beckons!  All things to the call respond; The trees are leaving and cashiers abscond
Peculiarly exposed to the tooth of detraction; vilifed; hopelessly in the wrong; superseded in the consideration and affection of another.  To men a man is but a mind.  Who cares What face he carries or what form he wears? But woman's body is the woman.  O, Stay thou, my sweetheart, and do never go, But heed the warning words the sage hath said: A woman absent is a woman dead.  Jogo
Independent, irresponsible.  An absolute monarchy is one in which the sovereign does as he pleases so long as he pleases the assassins.  Not many absolute monarchies are left, most of them having been replaced by limited monarchies, where the sovereign's power for evil (and for good) is greatly curtailed, and by republics, which are governed by chance. 
A weak person who yields to the temptation of denying himself a pleasure.  A total abstainer is one who abstains from everything but abstention, and especially from inactivity in the affairs of others.  Said a man to a crapulent youth:  "I thought You a total abstainer, my son." "So I am, so I am," said the scapegrace caught-- "But not, sir, a bigoted one."  G.J.  
One associated with another in a crime, having guilty knowledge and complicity, as an attorney who defends a criminal, knowing him guilty.  This view of the attorney's position in the matter has not hitherto commanded the assent of attorneys, no one having offered them a fee for assenting. 
The mother of caution.  "My accountability, bear in mind," Said the Grand Vizier:  "Yes, yes," Said the Shah:  "I do--'tis the only kind Of ability you possess."  Joram Tate  
A person whom we know well enough to borrow from, but not well enough to lend to.  A degree of friendship called slight when its object is poor or obscure, and intimate when he is rich or famous.  ACTUALLY, adv.  Perhaps; possibly. 
The smallest current coin.  "The man was in such deep distress," Said Tom, "that I could do no less Than give him good advice."  Said Jim: "If less could have been done for him I know you well enough, my son, To know that's what you would have done."  Jebel Jocordy   AFFIANCED, pp.  Fitted with an ankle-ring for the ball-and-chain. 
  The task we set our wishes to. "Cheer up!  Have you no aim in life?" She tenderly inquired. "An aim?  Well, no, I haven't, wife; The fact is--I have fired."  G.J.  
The Mahometan Supreme Being, as distinguished from the Christian, Jewish, and so forth.  Allah's good laws I faithfully have kept, And ever for the sins of man have wept; And sometimes kneeling in the temple I Have reverently crossed my hands and slept.  Junker Barlow  
The crocodile of America, superior in every detail to the crocodile of the effete monarchies of the Old World.  Herodotus says the Indus is, with one exception, the only river that produces crocodiles, but they appear to have gone West and grown up with the other rivers.  From the notches on his back the alligator is called a sawrian. 
The place whereupon the priest formerly raveled out the small intestine of the sacrificial victim for purposes of divination and cooked its flesh for the gods.  The word is now seldom used, except with reference to the sacrifice of their liberty and peace by a male and a female tool.  They stood before the altar and supplied The fire themselves in which their fat was fried. In vain the sacrifice!--no god will claim An offering burnt with an unholy flame.  M.P.
Predigested wisdom.  The flabby wine-skin of his brain Yields to some pathologic strain, And voids from its unstored abysm The driblet of an aphorism.  "The Mad Philosopher," 1697   APOLOGIZE, v.i.  To lay the foundation for a future offence. 
The physician's accomplice, undertaker's benefactor and grave worm's provider.  When Jove sent blessings to all men that are, And Mercury conveyed them in a jar, That friend of tricksters introduced by stealth Disease for the apothecary's health, Whose gratitude impelled him to proclaim: "My deadliest drug shall bear my patron's name!"  G.J.  
An ecclesiastical dignitary one point holier than a bishop.  If I were a jolly archbishop, On Fridays I'd eat all the fish up-- Salmon and flounders and smelts; On other days everything else.  Jodo Rem  
A kind of cosmetic greatly affected by the ladies, whom it greatly affects in turn.  "Eat arsenic?  Yes, all you get," Consenting, he did speak up; "'Tis better you should eat it, pet, Than put it in my teacup."  Joel Huck  
This word has no definition.  Its origin is related as follows by the ingenious Father Gassalasca Jape, S.J.  One day a wag--what would the wretch be at?-- Shifted a letter of the cipher RAT, And said it was a god's name!  Straight arose Fantastic priests and postulants (with shows, And mysteries, and mummeries, and hymns, And disputations dire that lamed their limbs)
A public singer with a good voice but no ear.  In Virginia City, Nevada, he is called the Washoe Canary, in Dakota, the Senator, and everywhere the Donkey.  The animal is widely and variously celebrated in the literature, art and religion of every age and country; no other so engages and fires the human imagination as this noble vertebrate.  Indeed, it is doubted by some (Ramasilus, _lib. II., De Clem._, and C.
The lake by which the ancients entered the infernal regions.  The fact that access to the infernal regions was obtained by a lake is believed by the learned Marcus Ansello Scrutator to have suggested the Christian rite of baptism by immersion.  This, however, has been shown by Lactantius to be an error.  _Facilis descensus Averni,_ The poet remarks; and the sense Of it is that when down-hill I turn I
An old deity formerly much worshiped under various names. As Baal he was popular with the Phoenicians; as Belus or Bel he had the honor to be served by the priest Berosus, who wrote the famous account of the Deluge; as Babel he had a tower partly erected to his glory on the Plain of Shinar.  From Babel comes our English word "babble."  Under whatever name worshiped, Baal is the Sun-god.  As Beelzeb
A convenient deity invented by the ancients as an excuse for getting drunk.  Is public worship, then, a sin, That for devotions paid to Bacchus The lictors dare to run us in, And resolutely thump and whack us?  Jorace  
A sacred rite of such efficacy that he who finds himself in heaven without having undergone it will be unhappy forever.  It is performed with water in two ways--by immersion, or plunging, and by aspersion, or sprinkling.  But whether the plan of immersion Is better than simple aspersion Let those immersed And those aspersed Decide by the Authorized Version, And by matching their agues tertian.  G.J.  
The cockatrice.  A sort of serpent hatched from the egg of a cock.  The basilisk had a bad eye, and its glance was fatal. Many infidels deny this creature's existence, but Semprello Aurator saw and handled one that had been blinded by lightning as a punishment for having fatally gazed on a lady of rank whom Jupiter loved.  Juno afterward restored the reptile's sight and hid it in a cave.  Nothing is so well attested by the
A kind of mystic ceremony substituted for religious worship, with what spiritual efficacy has not been determined.  The man who taketh a steam bath He loseth all the skin he hath, And, for he's boiled a brilliant red, Thinketh to cleanliness he's wed, Forgetting that his lungs he's soiling With dirty vapors of the boiling.  Richard Gwow  
To make an ingrate.  BEG, v.  To ask for something with an earnestness proportioned to the belief that it will not be given.  Who is that, father? A mendicant, child, Haggard, morose, and unaffable--wild! See how he glares through the bars of his cell! With Citizen Mendicant all is not well.  Why did they put him there, father?  Because Obeying his belly he
Conduct, as determined, not by principle, but by breeding.  The word seems to be somewhat loosely used in Dr. Jamrach Holobom's translation of the following lines from the _Dies Irae_:  Recordare, Jesu pie, Quod sum causa tuae viae. Ne me perdas illa die.  Pray remember, sacred Savior, Whose the thoughtless hand that gave your Death-blow.  Pardon such
An order of monks otherwise known as black friars.  She thought it a crow, but it turn out to be A monk of St. Benedict croaking a text. "Here's one of an order of cooks," said she-- "Black friars in this world, fried black in the next."  "The Devil on Earth" (London, 1712)  
One who makes heavy purchases of ingratitude, without, however, materially affecting the price, which is still within the means of all.  BERENICE'S HAIR, n.  A constellation (_Coma Berenices_) named in honor of one who sacrificed her hair to save her husband.  Her locks an ancient lady gave Her loving husband's life to save; And men--they honored so the dame-- Upon some stars bestowed her name.  But to
The first and direst of all disasters.  As to the nature of it there appears to be no uniformity.  Castor and Pollux were born from the egg.  Pallas came out of a skull.  Galatea was once a block of stone.  Peresilis, who wrote in the tenth century, avers that he grew up out of the ground where a priest had spilled holy water.  It is known that Arimaxus was derived from a
A man whose qualities, prepared for display like a box of berries in a market--the fine ones on top--have been opened on the wrong side.  An inverted gentleman.  BLANK-VERSE, n.  Unrhymed iambic pentameters--the most difficult kind of English verse to write acceptably; a kind, therefore, much affected by those who cannot acceptably write any kind.  BODY-SNATCHER, n.  A robber of
A fool who, having property of his own, undertakes to become responsible for that entrusted to another to a third.  Philippe of Orleans wishing to appoint one of his favorites, a dissolute nobleman, to a high office, asked him what security he would be able to give.  "I need no bondsmen," he replied, "for I can give you my word of honor."  "And pray what may be the value of that?" inquired the amused Regent.  "
The science of vegetables--those that are not good to eat, as well as those that are.  It deals largely with their flowers, which are commonly badly designed, inartistic in color, and ill-smelling.  BOTTLE-NOSED, adj.  Having a nose created in the image of its maker. 
The liberality of one who has much, in permitting one who has nothing to get all that he can.  A single swallow, it is said, devours ten millions of insects every year.  The supplying of these insects I take to be a signal instance of the Creator's bounty in providing for the lives of His creatures.  Henry Ward Beecher  
He who created the Hindoos, who are preserved by Vishnu and destroyed by Siva--a rather neater division of labor than is found among the deities of some other nations.  The Abracadabranese, for example, are created by Sin, maintained by Theft and destroyed by Folly.  The priests of Brahma, like those of Abracadabranese, are holy and learned men who are never naughty.  O Brahma, thou rare old
An apparatus with which we think what we think.  That which distinguishes the man who is content to _be_ something from the man who wishes to _do_ something.  A man of great wealth, or one who has been pitchforked into high station, has commonly such a headful of brain that his neighbors cannot keep their hats on.  In our civilization, and under our republican form of government, brain is so highly honored that it is rewarded by exemption from the cares of office
A cordial composed of one part thunder-and-lightning, one part remorse, two parts bloody murder, one part death-hell-and-the grave and four parts clarified Satan.  Dose, a headful all the time. Brandy is said by Dr. Johnson to be the drink of heroes.  Only a hero will venture to drink it. 
A familiar kitchen-garden vegetable about as large and wise as a man's head.  The cabbage is so called from Cabagius, a prince who on ascending the throne issued a decree appointing a High Council of Empire consisting of the members of his predecessor's Ministry and the cabbages in the royal garden.  When any of his Majesty's measures of state policy miscarried conspicuously it was gravely announced that several members of the High Council had been beheaded, and his murmuring
Gifted with great fortitude to bear the evils afflicting another.  When Zeno was told that one of his enemies was no more he was observed to be deeply moved.  "What!" said one of his disciples, "you weep at the death of an enemy?"  "Ah, 'tis true," replied the great Stoic; "but you should see me smile at the death of a friend." 
A quadruped (the _Splaypes humpidorsus_) of great value to the show business.  There are two kinds of camels--the camel proper and the camel improper.  It is the latter that is always exhibited. 
The seat of misgovernment.  That which provides the fire, the pot, the dinner, the table and the knife and fork for the anarchist; the part of the repast that himself supplies is the disgrace before meat.  _Capital Punishment_, a penalty regarding the justice and expediency of which many worthy persons--including all the assassins--entertain grave misgivings. 
A mendicant friar of the order of Mount Carmel.  As Death was a-riding out one day, Across Mount Carmel he took his way, Where he met a mendicant monk, Some three or four quarters drunk, With a holy leer and a pious grin, Ragged and fat and as saucy as sin, Who held out his hands and cried: "Give, give in Charity's name, I pray. Give in the name of the Church
Relating to Descartes, a famous philosopher, author of the celebrated dictum, _Cogito ergo sum_--whereby he was pleased to suppose he demonstrated the reality of human existence.  The dictum might be improved, however, thus:  _Cogito cogito ergo cogito sum_-- "I think that I think, therefore I think that I am;" as close an approach to certainty as any philosopher has yet made. 
A soft, indestructible automaton provided by nature to be kicked when things go wrong in the domestic circle.  This is a dog, This is a cat. This is a frog, This is a rat. Run, dog, mew, cat. Jump, frog, gnaw, rat.  Elevenson  
An isolated suburban spot where mourners match lies, poets write at a target and stone-cutters spell for a wager.  The inscriptions following will serve to illustrate the success attained in these Olympian games:  His virtues were so conspicuous that his enemies, unable to overlook them, denied them, and his friends, to whose loose lives they were a rebuke, represented them as vices. They are here commemorated by his family, who shared them.  In the earth we here
One of a race of persons who lived before the division of labor had been carried to such a pitch of differentiation, and who followed the primitive economic maxim, "Every man his own horse."  The best of the lot was Chiron, who to the wisdom and virtues of the horse added the fleetness of man.  The scripture story of the head of John the Baptist on a charger shows that pagan myths have somewhat sophisticated sacred history. 
The watch-dog of Hades, whose duty it was to guard the entrance--against whom or what does not clearly appear; everybody, sooner or later, had to go there, and nobody wanted to carry off the entrance.  Cerberus is known to have had three heads, and some of the poets have credited him with as many as a hundred.  Professor Graybill, whose clerky erudition and profound knowledge of Greek give his opinion great weight, has averaged all the estimates, and makes
One who believes that the New Testament is a divinely inspired book admirably suited to the spiritual needs of his neighbor. One who follows the teachings of Christ in so far as they are not inconsistent with a life of sin.  I dreamed I stood upon a hill, and, lo! The godly multitudes walked to and fro Beneath, in Sabbath garments fitly clad, With pious mien, appropriately sad, While all the church bells made a solemn din-- A fire-al
One of the nine Muses.  Clio's function was to preside over history--which she did with great dignity, many of the prominent citizens of Athens occupying seats on the platform, the meetings being addressed by Messrs. Xenophon, Herodotus and other popular speakers. 
A machine of great moral value to man, allaying his concern for the future by reminding him what a lot of time remains to him.  A busy man complained one day: "I get no time!"  "What's that you say?" Cried out his friend, a lazy quiz; "You have, sir, all the time there is. There's plenty, too, and don't you doubt it-- We're never for an hour without it."  Purzil Crofe
A man who piously shuts himself up to meditate upon the sin of wickedness; and to keep it fresh in his mind joins a brotherhood of awful examples.  O Coenobite, O coenobite, Monastical gregarian, You differ from the anchorite, That solitudinarian: With vollied prayers you wound Old Nick; With dropping shots he makes him sick.  Quincy Giles  
An administrative entity operated by an incalculable multitude of political parasites, logically active but fortuitously efficient.  This commonwealth's capitol's corridors view, So thronged with a hungry and indolent crew Of clerks, pages, porters and all attaches Whom rascals appoint and the populace pays That a cat cannot slip through the thicket of shins Nor hear its own shriek for the noise of their chins. On clerks and on pages, and p
The eloquence of power.  CONDOLE, v.i.  To show that bereavement is a smaller evil than sympathy.  CONFIDANT, CONFIDANTE, n.  One entrusted by A with the secrets of B, confided by _him_ to C. 
A specialist who knows everything about something and nothing about anything else.  An old wine-bibber having been smashed in a railway collision, some wine was poured on his lips to revive him.  "Pauillac, 1873," he murmured and died. 
In American politics, a person who having failed to secure an office from the people is given one by the Administration on condition that he leave the country.  CONSULT, v.i.  To seek another's disapproval of a course already decided on. 
A battle in which spittle or ink replaces the injurious cannon-ball and the inconsiderate bayonet.  In controversy with the facile tongue-- That bloodless warfare of the old and young-- So seek your adversary to engage That on himself he shall exhaust his rage, And, like a snake that's fastened to the ground, With his own fangs inflict the fatal wound. You ask me how this miracle is done? Adopt his own opinions, one by one, And
A man who occupies the lowest rung of the military ladder.  Fiercely the battle raged and, sad to tell, Our corporal heroically fell! Fame from her height looked down upon the brawl And said:  "He hadn't very far to fall."  Giacomo Smith  
A small crustacean very much resembling the lobster, but less indigestible.  In this small fish I take it that human wisdom is admirably figured and symbolized; for whereas the crayfish doth move only backward, and can have only retrospection, seeing naught but the perils already passed, so the wisdom of man doth not enable him to avoid the follies that beset his course, but only to apprehend their nature afterward.  Sir James Mer
A person who boasts himself hard to please because nobody tries to please him.  There is a land of pure delight, Beyond the Jordan's flood, Where saints, apparelled all in white, Fling back the critic's mud.  And as he legs it through the skies, His pelt a sable hue, He sorrows sore to recognize The missiles that he threw.  Orrin Goof  
An ancient religious symbol erroneously supposed to owe its significance to the most solemn event in the history of Christianity, but really antedating it by thousands of years.  By many it has been believed to be identical with the _crux ansata_ of the ancient phallic worship, but it has been traced even beyond all that we know of that, to the rites of primitive peoples.  We have to-day the White Cross as a symbol of chastity, and the Red Cross as
The faculty that distinguishes a weak animal or person from a strong one.  It brings its possessor much mental satisfaction and great material adversity.  An Italian proverb says:  "The furrier gets the skins of more foxes than asses." 
The so-called god of love.  This bastard creation of a barbarous fancy was no doubt inflicted upon mythology for the sins of its deities.  Of all unbeautiful and inappropriate conceptions this is the most reasonless and offensive.  The notion of symbolizing sexual love by a semisexless babe, and comparing the pains of passion to the wounds of an arrow--of introducing this pudgy homunculus into art grossly to materialize the subtle spirit and suggestion of the work
Energetically to belabor with a verbal slap-stick.  This is an operation which in literature, particularly in the drama, is commonly fatal to the victim.  Nevertheless, the liability to a cursing is a risk that cuts but a small figure in fixing the rates of life insurance. 
A blackguard whose faulty vision sees things as they are, not as they ought to be.  Hence the custom among the Scythians of plucking out a cynic's eyes to improve his vision.     D   DAMN, v.  A word formerly much used by the Paphlagonians, the meaning of which is lost.  By the learned Dr. Dolabelly Gak it is believed to have been a term of satisfaction, implying the highest
The time when men of reason go to bed.  Certain old men prefer to rise at about that time, taking a cold bath and a long walk with an empty stomach, and otherwise mortifying the flesh.  They then point with pride to these practices as the cause of their sturdy health and ripe years; the truth being that they are hearty and old, not because of their habits, but in spite of them.  The reason we find only robust persons doing this thing is that it has killed
A period of twenty-four hours, mostly misspent.  This period is divided into two parts, the day proper and the night, or day improper--the former devoted to sins of business, the latter consecrated to the other sort.  These two kinds of social activity overlap. 
An ingenious substitute for the chain and whip of the slave-driver.  As, pent in an aquarium, the troutlet Swims round and round his tank to find an outlet, Pressing his nose against the glass that holds him, Nor ever sees the prison that enfolds him; So the poor debtor, seeing naught around him, Yet feels the narrow limits that impound him, Grieves at his debt and studies to evade it, And finds at last he might as well
A series of commandments, ten in number--just enough to permit an intelligent selection for observance, but not enough to embarrass the choice.  Following is the revised edition of the Decalogue, calculated for this meridian.  Thou shalt no God but me adore: 'Twere too expensive to have more.  No images nor idols make For Robert Ingersoll to break.  Take not God's name in vain; select A time when it will have effect.  Work not on Sabbath
Less conspicuously admirable than one's ancestors. The contemporaries of Homer were striking examples of degeneracy; it required ten of them to raise a rock or a riot that one of the heroes of the Trojan war could have raised with ease.  Homer never tires of sneering at "men who live in these degenerate days," which is perhaps why they suffered him to beg his bread--a marked instance of returning good for evil, by the way, for if they had forbidden him he would certainly have
An extinct pachyderm that flourished when the Pterodactyl was in fashion.  The latter was a native of Ireland, its name being pronounced Terry Dactyl or Peter O'Dactyl, as the man pronouncing it may chance to have heard it spoken or seen it printed. 
The father of a most respectable family, comprising Enthusiasm, Affection, Self-denial, Faith, Hope, Charity and many other goodly sons and daughters.  All hail, Delusion!  Were it not for thee The world turned topsy-turvy we should see; For Vice, respectable with cleanly fancies, Would fly abandoned Virtue's gross advances.  Mumfrey Mappel  
A male relative of an office-holder, or of his bondsman. The deputy is commonly a beautiful young man, with a red necktie and an intricate system of cobwebs extending from his nose to his desk. When accidentally struck by the janitor's broom, he gives off a cloud of dust.  "Chief Deputy," the Master cried, "To-day the books are to be tried By experts and accountants who Have been commissioned to go through Our office here, to see
A daily record of that part of one's life, which he can relate to himself without blushing.  Hearst kept a diary wherein were writ All that he had of wisdom and of wit. So the Recording Angel, when Hearst died, Erased all entries of his own and cried: "I'll judge you by your diary."  Said Hearst: "Thank you; 'twill show you I am Saint the First"-- Straightway producing, jubilant and proud,
The singular of "dice."  We seldom hear the word, because there is a prohibitory proverb, "Never say die."  At long intervals, however, some one says:  "The die is cast," which is not true, for it is cut.  The word is found in an immortal couplet by that eminent poet and domestic economist, Senator Depew:  A cube of cheese no larger than a die May bait the trap to catch a nibbling mie. 
The conversion of victuals into virtues.  When the process is imperfect, vices are evolved instead--a circumstance from which that wicked writer, Dr. Jeremiah Blenn, infers that the ladies are the greater sufferers from dyspepsia. 
To present your neighbor with another and better error than the one which he has deemed it advantageous to embrace.  DISCRIMINATE, v.i.  To note the particulars in which one person or thing is, if possible, more objectionable than another. 
To celebrate with an appropriate ceremony the maturity of a command.  His right to govern me is clear as day, My duty manifest to disobey; And if that fit observance e'er I shut May I and duty be alike undone.  Israfel Brown   DISSEMBLE, v.i.  To put a clean shirt upon the character. Let us dissemble.  Adam  
A kind of additional or subsidiary Deity designed to catch the overflow and surplus of the world's worship.  This Divine Being in some of his smaller and silkier incarnations takes, in the affection of Woman, the place to which there is no human male aspirant.  The Dog is a survival--an anachronism.  He toils not, neither does he spin, yet Solomon in all his glory never lay upon a door-mat all day long, sun-soaked and
Priests and ministers of an ancient Celtic religion which did not disdain to employ the humble allurement of human sacrifice. Very little is now known about the Druids and their faith.  Pliny says their religion, originating in Britain, spread eastward as far as Persia.  Caesar says those who desired to study its mysteries went to Britain.  Caesar himself went to Britain, but does not appear to have obtained any high preferment in the Druidical Church, although his talent for human sacrifice
A formal ceremony preliminary to the reconciliation of two enemies.  Great skill is necessary to its satisfactory observance; if awkwardly performed the most unexpected and deplorable consequences sometimes ensue.  A long time ago a man lost his life in a duel.  That dueling's a gentlemanly vice I hold; and wish that it had been my lot To live my life out in some favored spot-- Some country where it is considered nice To split a rival like a fish, or slice A husband like
A member of the reigning dynasty in letters and life. The Dullards came in with Adam, and being both numerous and sturdy have overrun the habitable world.  The secret of their power is their insensibility to blows; tickle them with a bludgeon and they laugh with a platitude.  The Dullards came originally from Boeotia, whence they were driven by stress of starvation, their dullness having blighted the crops.  For some centuries they infested Philistia
That which sternly impels us in the direction of profit, along the line of desire.  Sir Lavender Portwine, in favor at court, Was wroth at his master, who'd kissed Lady Port. His anger provoked him to take the king's head, But duty prevailed, and he took the king's bread, Instead.  G.J.     E   EAT, v.i.  To perform successively (and successfully) the functions of
A person who combines the judicial functions of Minos, Rhadamanthus and Aeacus, but is placable with an obolus; a severely virtuous censor, but so charitable withal that he tolerates the virtues of others and the vices of himself; who flings about him the splintering lightning and sturdy thunders of admonition till he resembles a bunch of firecrackers petulantly uttering his mind at the tail of a dog; then straightway murmurs a
The second of two phenomena which always occur together in the same order.  The first, called a Cause, is said to generate the other--which is no more sensible than it would be for one who has never seen a dog except in the pursuit of a rabbit to declare the rabbit the cause of a dog. 
A person of low taste, more interested in himself than in me.  Megaceph, chosen to serve the State In the halls of legislative debate, One day with all his credentials came To the capitol's door and announced his name. The doorkeeper looked, with a comical twist Of the face, at the eminent egotist, And said:  "Go away, for we settle here All manner of questions, knotty and queer, And we cannot have, when the speaker
The power that causes all natural phenomena not known to be caused by something else.  It is the same thing as lightning, and its famous attempt to strike Dr. Franklin is one of the most picturesque incidents in that great and good man's career.  The memory of Dr. Franklin is justly held in great reverence, particularly in France, where a waxen effigy of him was recently on exhibition, bearing the following touching account of his life and services to science:  "M
A composition in verse, in which, without employing any of the methods of humor, the writer aims to produce in the reader's mind the dampest kind of dejection.  The most famous English example begins somewhat like this:  The cur foretells the knell of parting day; The loafing herd winds slowly o'er the lea; The wise man homeward plods; I only stay To fiddle-faddle in a minor key. 
An imaginary delightful country which the ancients foolishly believed to be inhabited by the spirits of the good.  This ridiculous and mischievous fable was swept off the face of the earth by the early Christians--may their souls be happy in Heaven! 
A bondman's change from the tyranny of another to the despotism of himself.  He was a slave:  at word he went and came; His iron collar cut him to the bone. Then Liberty erased his owner's name, Tightened the rivets and inscribed his own.  G.J.   EMBALM, v.i.  To cheat vegetation by locking up the gases upon which it feeds.  By embalming their dead and thereby deranging
The position farthest removed on either hand from the Interlocutor.  The man was perishing apace Who played the tambourine; The seal of death was on his face-- 'Twas pallid, for 'twas clean.  "This is the end," the sick man said In faint and failing tones. A moment later he was dead, And Tambourine was Bones.  Tinley Roquot   ENOUGH, pro.  All there is
A distemper of youth, curable by small doses of repentance in connection with outward applications of experience. Byron, who recovered long enough to call it "entuzy-muzy," had a relapse, which carried him off--to Missolonghi. 
A short, sharp saying in prose or verse, frequently characterized by acidity or acerbity and sometimes by wisdom. Following are some of the more notable epigrams of the learned and ingenious Dr. Jamrach Holobom:  We know better the needs of ourselves than of others.  To serve oneself is economy of administration.  In each human heart are a tiger, a pig, an ass and a nightingale.  Diversity of character is due to their unequal activity.
An inscription on a tomb, showing that virtues acquired by death have a retroactive effect.  Following is a touching example:  Here lie the bones of Parson Platt, Wise, pious, humble and all that, Who showed us life as all should live it; Let that be said--and God forgive it! 
Dust shaken out of a book into an empty skull.  So wide his erudition's mighty span, He knew Creation's origin and plan And only came by accident to grief-- He thought, poor man, 'twas right to be a thief.  Romach Pute  
Very particularly abstruse and consummately occult. The ancient philosophies were of two kinds,--_exoteric_, those that the philosophers themselves could partly understand, and _esoteric_, those that nobody could understand.  It is the latter that have most profoundly affected modern thought and found greatest acceptance in our time. 
A sacred feast of the religious sect of Theophagi. A dispute once unhappily arose among the members of this sect as to what it was that they ate.  In this controversy some five hundred thousand have already been slain, and the question is still unsettled. 
Lasting forever.  It is with no small diffidence that I venture to offer this brief and elementary definition, for I am not unaware of the existence of a bulky volume by a sometime Bishop of Worcester, entitled, _A Partial Definition of the Word "Everlasting," as Used in the Authorized Version of the Holy Scriptures_.  His book was once esteemed of great authority in the Anglican Church, and is still, I understand, studied with pleasure to the mind and profit of the soul
A thing which takes the liberty to differ from other things of its class, as an honest man, a truthful woman, etc.  "The exception proves the rule" is an expression constantly upon the lips of the ignorant, who parrot it from one another with never a thought of its absurdity.  In the Latin, "_Exceptio probat regulam_" means that the exception _tests_ the rule, puts it to the proof, not _confirms_ it.  The mal
In morals, an indulgence that enforces by appropriate penalties the law of moderation.  Hail, high Excess--especially in wine, To thee in worship do I bend the knee Who preach abstemiousness unto me-- My skull thy pulpit, as my paunch thy shrine. Precept on precept, aye, and line on line, Could ne'er persuade so sweetly to agree With reason as thy touch, exact and free, Upon my forehead and along my spine.
  This "excommunication" is a word In speech ecclesiastical oft heard, And means the damning, with bell, book and candle, Some sinner whose opinions are a scandal-- A rite permitting Satan to enslave him Forever, and forbidding Christ to save him.  Gat Huckle  
An officer of the Government, whose duty it is to enforce the wishes of the legislative power until such time as the judicial department shall be pleased to pronounce them invalid and of no effect.  Following is an extract from an old book entitled, _The Lunarian Astonished_--Pfeiffer & Co., Boston, 1803:  LUNARIAN:  Then when your Congress has passed a law it goes directly to the Supreme Court in order that it may at once be known whether
One who serves his country by residing abroad, yet is not an ambassador.  An English sea-captain being asked if he had read "The Exile of Erin," replied:  "No, sir, but I should like to anchor on it."  Years afterwards, when he had been hanged as a pirate after a career of unparalleled atrocities, the following memorandum was found in the ship's log that he had kept at the time of his reply:  Aug. 3d, 1842.
The wisdom that enables us to recognize as an undesirable old acquaintance the folly that we have already embraced.  To one who, journeying through night and fog, Is mired neck-deep in an unwholesome bog, Experience, like the rising of the dawn, Reveals the path that he should not have gone.  Joel Frad Bink  
A creature, variously fashioned and endowed, that formerly inhabited the meadows and forests.  It was nocturnal in its habits, and somewhat addicted to dancing and the theft of children.  The fairies are now believed by naturalists to be extinct, though a clergyman of the Church of England saw three near Colchester as lately as 1855, while passing through a park after dining with the lord of the manor.  The sight greatly staggered him, and he was so affected
Conspicuously miserable.  Done to a turn on the iron, behold Him who to be famous aspired. Content?  Well, his grill has a plating of gold, And his twistings are greatly admired.  Hassan Brubuddy  
A despot whom the wise ridicule and obey.  A king there was who lost an eye In some excess of passion; And straight his courtiers all did try To follow the new fashion.  Each dropped one eyelid when before The throne he ventured, thinking 'Twould please the king.  That monarch swore He'd slay them all for winking.  What should they do?  They were not hot To hazard such disaster; They dared not close an eye--dared not See
A festival.  A religious celebration usually signalized by gluttony and drunkenness, frequently in honor of some holy person distinguished for abstemiousness.  In the Roman Catholic Church feasts are "movable" and "immovable," but the celebrants are uniformly immovable until they are full.  In their earliest development these entertainments took the form of feasts for the dead; such were held by the Greeks, under the name _Nemeseia_, by the
One of the opposing, or unfair, sex.  The Maker, at Creation's birth, With living things had stocked the earth. From elephants to bats and snails, They all were good, for all were males. But when the Devil came and saw He said:  "By Thine eternal law Of growth, maturity, decay, These all must quickly pass away And leave untenanted the earth Unless Thou dost establish birth"-- Then tucked his head beneath his wing To laugh--
A lie that has not cut its teeth.  An habitual liar's nearest approach to truth:  the perigee of his eccentric orbit.  When David said:  "All men are liars," Dave, Himself a liar, fibbed like any thief. Perhaps he thought to weaken disbelief By proof that even himself was not a slave To Truth; though I suspect the aged knave Had been of all her servitors the chief Had he but known a fig's reluctant leaf Is more than
An instrument to tickle human ears by friction of a horse's tail on the entrails of a cat.  To Rome said Nero:  "If to smoke you turn I shall not cease to fiddle while you burn." To Nero Rome replied:  "Pray do your worst, 'Tis my excuse that you were fiddling first."  Orm Pludge  
The Second Person of the secular Trinity.  FLOP, v.  Suddenly to change one's opinions and go over to another party.  The most notable flop on record was that of Saul of Tarsus, who has been severely criticised as a turn-coat by some of our partisan journals.  FLY-SPECK, n.  The prototype of punctuation.  It is observed by Garvinus that the systems of punctuation in use by the various literary nations depended
That "gift and faculty divine" whose creative and controlling energy inspires Man's mind, guides his actions and adorns his life.  Folly! although Erasmus praised thee once In a thick volume, and all authors known, If not thy glory yet thy power have shown, Deign to take homage from thy son who hunts Through all thy maze his brothers, fool and dunce, To mend their lives and to sustain his own, However feebly be his arrows thrown, 
A person who pervades the domain of intellectual speculation and diffuses himself through the channels of moral activity.  He is omnific, omniform, omnipercipient, omniscient, omnipotent.  He it was who invented letters, printing, the railroad, the steamboat, the telegraph, the platitude and the circle of the sciences.  He created patriotism and taught the nations war--founded theology, philosophy, law, medicine and Chicago.  He established monarchical and
This looks like an easy word to define, but when I consider that pious and learned theologians have spent long lives in explaining it, and written libraries to explain their explanations; when I remember that nations have been divided and bloody battles caused by the difference between foreordination and predestination, and that millions of treasure have been expended in the effort to prove and disprove its compatibility with freedom of the will and the efficacy of prayer, praise, and a religious life,--recalling these awful
An instrument used chiefly for the purpose of putting dead animals into the mouth.  Formerly the knife was employed for this purpose, and by many worthy persons is still thought to have many advantages over the other tool, which, however, they do not altogether reject, but use to assist in charging the knife.  The immunity of these persons from swift and awful death is one of the most striking proofs of God's mercy to those that hate Him.  FORMA PAUPERIS.  [
The tenure by which a religious corporation holds lands on condition of praying for the soul of the donor.  In mediaeval times many of the wealthiest fraternities obtained their estates in this simple and cheap manner, and once when Henry VIII of England sent an officer to confiscate certain vast possessions which a fraternity of monks held by frankalmoigne, "What!" said the Prior, "would your master stay our benefactor's soul in Purgatory?"  "Ay," said the officer, cold
Exemption from the stress of authority in a beggarly half dozen of restraint's infinite multitude of methods.  A political condition that every nation supposes itself to enjoy in virtual monopoly.  Liberty.  The distinction between freedom and liberty is not accurately known; naturalists have never been able to find a living specimen of either.  Freedom, as every schoolboy knows, Once shrieked as Kosciusko fell; On every wind, indeed, that blows I hear her yell. 
An order with secret rites, grotesque ceremonies and fantastic costumes, which, originating in the reign of Charles II, among working artisans of London, has been joined successively by the dead of past centuries in unbroken retrogression until now it embraces all the generations of man on the hither side of Adam and is drumming up distinguished recruits among the pre-Creational inhabitants of Chaos and Formless Void.  The order was founded at different times by Charlemagne, Julius Caesar, Cyrus,
A ship big enough to carry two in fair weather, but only one in foul.  The sea was calm and the sky was blue; Merrily, merrily sailed we two. (High barometer maketh glad.) On the tipsy ship, with a dreadful shout, The tempest descended and we fell out. (O the walking is nasty bad!)  Armit Huff Bettle  
A reptile with edible legs.  The first mention of frogs in profane literature is in Homer's narrative of the war between them and the mice.  Skeptical persons have doubted Homer's authorship of the work, but the learned, ingenious and industrious Dr. Schliemann has set the question forever at rest by uncovering the bones of the slain frogs.  One of the forms of moral suasion by which Pharaoh was besought to favor the Israelities was a plague
A pageant whereby we attest our respect for the dead by enriching the undertaker, and strengthen our grief by an expenditure that deepens our groans and doubles our tears.  The savage dies--they sacrifice a horse To bear to happy hunting-grounds the corse. Our friends expire--we make the money fly In hope their souls will chase it to the sky.  Jex Wopley  
A stage for the performance of miracle plays, in which the leading actor is translated to heaven.  In this country the gallows is chiefly remarkable for the number of persons who escape it.  Whether on the gallows high Or where blood flows the reddest, The noblest place for man to die-- Is where he died the deadest.  (Old play)  
A rain-spout projecting from the eaves of mediaeval buildings, commonly fashioned into a grotesque caricature of some personal enemy of the architect or owner of the building.  This was especially the case in churches and ecclesiastical structures generally, in which the gargoyles presented a perfect rogues' gallery of local heretics and controversialists.  Sometimes when a new dean and chapter were installed the old gargoyles were removed and others substituted having a closer relation to the private animosities of the
Refined, after the fashion of a gent.  Observe with care, my son, the distinction I reveal: A gentleman is gentle and a gent genteel. Heed not the definitions your "Unabridged" presents, For dictionary makers are generally gents.  G.J.  
A chap who can tell you offhand the difference between the outside of the world and the inside.  Habeam, geographer of wide reknown, Native of Abu-Keber's ancient town, In passing thence along the river Zam To the adjacent village of Xelam, Bewildered by the multitude of roads, Got lost, lived long on migratory toads, Then from exposure miserably died, And grateful travelers bewailed their guide.  Henry Haukhorn
The science of the earth's crust--to which, doubtless, will be added that of its interior whenever a man shall come up garrulous out of a well.  The geological formations of the globe already noted are catalogued thus:  The Primary, or lower one, consists of rocks, bones or mired mules, gas-pipes, miners' tools, antique statues minus the nose, Spanish doubloons and ancestors.  The Secondary is largely made up of red worms and
The outward and visible sign of an inward fear.  He saw a ghost. It occupied--that dismal thing!-- The path that he was following. Before he'd time to stop and fly, An earthquake trifled with the eye That saw a ghost. He fell as fall the early good; Unmoved that awful vision stood. The stars that danced before his ken He wildly brushed away, and then He saw a post.  Jared Macphester   Accounting for the uncommon behavior of
A demon addicted to the reprehensible habit of devouring the dead.  The existence of ghouls has been disputed by that class of controversialists who are more concerned to deprive the world of comforting beliefs than to give it anything good in their place.  In 1640 Father Secchi saw one in a cemetery near Florence and frightened it away with the sign of the cross.  He describes it as gifted with many heads and an uncommon allowance of limbs, and he saw it in more than one place
In North-European mythology, a dwarfish imp inhabiting the interior parts of the earth and having special custody of mineral treasures.  Bjorsen, who died in 1765, says gnomes were common enough in the southern parts of Sweden in his boyhood, and he frequently saw them scampering on the hills in the evening twilight.  Ludwig Binkerhoof saw three as recently as 1792, in the Black Forest, and Sneddeker avers that in 1803 they
An animal of South Africa, which in its domesticated state resembles a horse, a buffalo and a stag.  In its wild condition it is something like a thunderbolt, an earthquake and a cyclone.  A hunter from Kew caught a distant view Of a peacefully meditative gnu, And he said:  "I'll pursue, and my hands imbrue In its blood at a closer interview." But that beast did ensue and the hunter it threw O'er the top
A bird that supplies quills for writing.  These, by some occult process of nature, are penetrated and suffused with various degrees of the bird's intellectual energies and emotional character, so that when inked and drawn mechanically across paper by a person called an "author," there results a very fair and accurate transcript of the fowl's thought and feeling.  The difference in geese, as discovered by this ingenious method, is considerable:  many are found to have only trivial and insignificant powers
Three beautiful goddesses, Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosyne, who attended upon Venus, serving without salary.  They were at no expense for board and clothing, for they ate nothing to speak of and dressed according to the weather, wearing whatever breeze happened to be blowing. 
  Hail noble fruit!--by Homer sung, Anacreon and Khayyam; Thy praise is ever on the tongue Of better men than I am.  The lyre in my hand has never swept, The song I cannot offer: My humbler service pray accept-- I'll help to kill the scoffer. The water-drinkers and the cranks Who load their skins with liquor-- I'll gladly bear their belly-tanks And tap them with my sticker.  Fill
A place in which the dead are laid to await the coming of the medical student.  Beside a lonely grave I stood-- With brambles 'twas encumbered; The winds were moaning in the wood, Unheard by him who slumbered,  A rustic standing near, I said: "He cannot hear it blowing!" "'Course not," said he:  "the feller's dead-- He can't hear nowt that's going."  "Too true," I
The tendency of all bodies to approach one another with a strength proportioned to the quantity of matter they contain-- the quantity of matter they contain being ascertained by the strength of their tendency to approach one another.  This is a lovely and edifying illustration of how science, having made A the proof of B, makes B the proof of A. 
  "I'm great," the Lion said--"I reign The monarch of the wood and plain!"  The Elephant replied:  "I'm great-- No quadruped can match my weight!"  "I'm great--no animal has half So long a neck!" said the Giraffe.  "I'm great," the Kangaroo said--"see My femoral muscularity!"  The 'Possum said:  "I'm great--behold, My tail is lit
A machine which makes a Frenchman shrug his shoulders with good reason.  In his great work on _Divergent Lines of Racial Evolution_, the learned Professor Brayfugle argues from the prevalence of this gesture --the shrug--among Frenchmen, that they are descended from turtles and it is simply a survival of the habit of retracting the head inside the shell.  It is with reluctance that I differ with so eminent an authority, but in my judgment (as more elaborately set forth
An agency employed by civilized nations for the settlement of disputes which might become troublesome if left unadjusted.  By most writers the invention of gunpowder is ascribed to the Chinese, but not upon very convincing evidence.  Milton says it was invented by the devil to dispel angels with, and this opinion seems to derive some support from the scarcity of angels.  Moreover, it has the hearty concurrence of the Hon. James Wilson, Secretary of Agriculture.  Secretary Wilson became interested in gunpowder through
The lower world; the residence of departed spirits; the place where the dead live.  Among the ancients the idea of Hades was not synonymous with our Hell, many of the most respectable men of antiquity residing there in a very comfortable kind of way.  Indeed, the Elysian Fields themselves were a part of Hades, though they have since been removed to Paris. When the Jacobean version of the New Testament was in process of evolution the pious and learned men engaged in the work insisted by
An elderly lady whom you do not happen to like; sometimes called, also, a hen, or cat.  Old witches, sorceresses, etc., were called hags from the belief that their heads were surrounded by a kind of baleful lumination or nimbus--hag being the popular name of that peculiar electrical light sometimes observed in the hair.  At one time hag was not a word of reproach:  Drayton speaks of a "beautiful hag,
One of two equal parts into which a thing may be divided, or considered as divided.  In the fourteenth century a heated discussion arose among theologists and philosophers as to whether Omniscience could part an object into three halves; and the pious Father Aldrovinus publicly prayed in the cathedral at Rouen that God would demonstrate the affirmative of the proposition in some signal and unmistakable way, and particularly (if it should please Him) upon the body of that hardy blasphemer, Man
Properly, a luminous ring encircling an astronomical body, but not infrequently confounded with "aureola," or "nimbus," a somewhat similar phenomenon worn as a head-dress by divinities and saints.  The halo is a purely optical illusion, produced by moisture in the air, in the manner of a rainbow; but the aureola is conferred as a sign of superior sanctity, in the same way as a bishop's mitre,
A small square of silk or linen, used in various ignoble offices about the face and especially serviceable at funerals to conceal the lack of tears.  The handkerchief is of recent invention; our ancestors knew nothing of it and intrusted its duties to the sleeve.  Shakespeare's introducing it into the play of "Othello" is an anachronism:  Desdemona dried her nose with her skirt, as Dr. Mary Walker and other reformers have done
An officer of the law charged with duties of the highest dignity and utmost gravity, and held in hereditary disesteem by a populace having a criminal ancestry.  In some of the American States his functions are now performed by an electrician, as in New Jersey, where executions by electricity have recently been ordered--the first instance known to this lexicographer of anybody questioning the expediency of hanging Jerseymen. 
A sect of Protestants, now extinct, who came from Europe in the beginning of the last century and were distinguished for the bitterness of their internal controversies and dissensions.  HASH, x.  There is no definition for this word--nobody knows what hash is. 
A young axe, known among Indians as a Thomashawk.  "O bury the hatchet, irascible Red, For peace is a blessing," the White Man said. The Savage concurred, and that weapon interred, With imposing rites, in the White Man's head.  John Lukkus  
A sentiment appropriate to the occasion of another's superiority.  HEAD-MONEY, n.  A capitation tax, or poll-tax.  In ancient times there lived a king Whose tax-collectors could not wring From all his subjects gold enough To make the royal way less rough. For pleasure's highway, like the dames Whose premises adjoin it, claims Perpetual repairing.  So The tax-collectors in a row Appeared before the throne to
An automatic, muscular blood-pump.  Figuratively, this useful organ is said to be the seat of emotions and sentiments--a very pretty fancy which, however, is nothing but a survival of a once universal belief.  It is now known that the sentiments and emotions reside in the stomach, being evolved from food by chemical action of the gastric fluid.  The exact process by which a beefsteak becomes a feeling--tender or not, according to the age of the
  Heat, says Professor Tyndall, is a mode Of motion, but I know now how he's proving His point; but this I know--hot words bestowed With skill will set the human fist a-moving, And where it stops the stars burn free and wild. _Crede expertum_--I have seen them, child.  Gorton Swope  
A benighted creature who has the folly to worship something that he can see and feel.  According to Professor Howison, of the California State University, Hebrews are heathens.  "The Hebrews are heathens!" says Howison.  He's A Christian philosopher.  I'm A scurril agnostical chap, if you please, Addicted too much to the crime Of religious discussion in my rhyme.  Though Hebrew and Howison cannot agree On a
A wife, or bitter half.  "Now, why is yer wife called a helpmate, Pat?" Says the priest.  "Since the time 'o yer wooin' She's niver assisted in what ye were at-- For it's naught ye are ever doin'."  "That's true of yer Riverence," Patrick replies, And no sign of contrition envinces; "But, bedad, it's a fact which the word implies
A person whose vices and follies are not sociable.  HERS, pron.  His.  HIBERNATE, v.i.  To pass the winter season in domestic seclusion. There have been many singular popular notions about the hibernation of various animals.  Many believe that the bear hibernates during the whole winter and subsists by mechanically sucking its paws.  It is admitted that it comes out of its retirement in the spring so lean that it had to
An animal (now extinct) which was half horse and half griffin.  The griffin was itself a compound creature, half lion and half eagle.  The hippogriff was actually, therefore, a one-quarter eagle, which is two dollars and fifty cents in gold.  The study of zoology is full of surprises. 
An account mostly false, of events mostly unimportant, which are brought about by rulers mostly knaves, and soldiers mostly fools.  Of Roman history, great Niebuhr's shown 'Tis nine-tenths lying.  Faith, I wish 'twere known, Ere we accept great Niebuhr as a guide, Wherein he blundered and how much he lied.  Salder Bupp  
A bird remarkable for the catholicity of its appetite and serving to illustrate that of ours.  Among the Mahometans and Jews, the hog is not in favor as an article of diet, but is respected for the delicacy and the melody of its voice.  It is chiefly as a songster that the fowl is esteemed; the cage of him in full chorus has been known to draw tears from two persons at once.  The scientific name of this dicky-bird is _
The slaying of one human being by another.  There are four kinds of homocide:  felonious, excusable, justifiable, and praiseworthy, but it makes no great difference to the person slain whether he fell by one kind or another--the classification is for advantage of the lawyers. 
The science of adapting sermons to the spiritual needs, capacities and conditions of the congregation.  So skilled the parson was in homiletics That all his normal purges and emetics To medicine the spirit were compounded With a most just discrimination founded Upon a rigorous examination Of tongue and pulse and heart and respiration. Then, having diagnosed each one's condition, His scriptural specifics this physician Administered--his pills so efficacious And pukes of disposition so vivacious That souls afflicted with
Desire and expectation rolled into one.  Delicious Hope! when naught to man is left-- Of fortune destitute, of friends bereft; When even his dog deserts him, and his goat With tranquil disaffection chews his coat While yet it hangs upon his back; then thou, The star far-flaming on thine angel brow, Descendest, radiant, from the skies to hint The promise of a clerkship in the Mint.  Fogarty Weffing
A peculiarly sharp and specially applied sense of the earth's overpopulation.  Hostility is classified as active and passive; as (respectively) the feeling of a woman for her female friends, and that which she entertains for all the rest of her sex. 
A comely female inhabiting the Mohammedan Paradise to make things cheery for the good Mussulman, whose belief in her existence marks a noble discontent with his earthly spouse, whom he denies a soul.  By that good lady the Houris are said to be held in deficient esteem. 
A hollow edifice erected for the habitation of man, rat, mouse, beetle, cockroach, fly, mosquito, flea, bacillus and microbe. _House of Correction_, a place of reward for political and personal service, and for the detention of offenders and appropriations. _House of God_, a building with a steeple and a mortgage on it. _House-dog_, a pestilent beast kept on domestic premises to insult persons passing by and app
The fruit of a flower called the Palace.  Twaddle had a hovel, Twiddle had a palace; Twaddle said:  "I'll grovel Or he'll think I bear him malice"-- A sentiment as novel As a castor on a chalice.  Down upon the middle Of his legs fell Twaddle And astonished Mr. Twiddle, Who began to lift his noddle. Feed upon the fiddle- Faddle flummery, unswaddle A new
A plague that would have softened down the hoar austerity of Pharaoh's heart and persuaded him to dismiss Israel with his best wishes, cat-quick.  Lo! the poor humorist, whose tortured mind See jokes in crowds, though still to gloom inclined-- Whose simple appetite, untaught to stray, His brains, renewed by night, consumes by day. He thinks, admitted to an equal sty, A graceful hog would bear his company.  Alexander Poke  
An atmospheric demonstration once very common but now generally abandoned for the tornado and cyclone.  The hurricane is still in popular use in the West Indies and is preferred by certain old-fashioned sea-captains.  It is also used in the construction of the upper decks of steamboats, but generally speaking, the hurricane's usefulness has outlasted it. 
Depression of one's own spirits.  Some heaps of trash upon a vacant lot Where long the village rubbish had been shot Displayed a sign among the stuff and stumps-- "Hypochondriasis."  It meant The Dumps.  Bogul S. Purvy  
One who, professing virtues that he does not respect secures the advantage of seeming to be what he despises.     I   I is the first letter of the alphabet, the first word of the language, the first thought of the mind, the first object of affection.  In grammar it is a pronoun of the first person and singular number.  Its plural is said to be _We_, but how there can be more than one myself is doubtless clearer to the
A fluid that serves the gods and goddesses in place of blood.  Fair Venus, speared by Diomed, Restrained the raging chief and said: "Behold, rash mortal, whom you've bled-- Your soul's stained white with ichorshed!"  Mary Doke  
A breaker of idols, the worshipers whereof are imperfectly gratified by the performance, and most strenuously protest that he unbuildeth but doth not reedify, that he pulleth down but pileth not up.  For the poor things would have other idols in place of those he thwacketh upon the mazzard and dispelleth.  But the iconoclast saith:  "Ye shall have none at all, for ye need them not;
A member of a large and powerful tribe whose influence in human affairs has always been dominant and controlling.  The Idiot's activity is not confined to any special field of thought or action, but "pervades and regulates the whole."  He has the last word in everything; his decision is unappealable.  He sets the fashions and opinion of taste, dictates the limitations of speech and circumscribes conduct with a dead-line. 
A person unacquainted with certain kinds of knowledge familiar to yourself, and having certain other kinds that you know nothing about.  Dumble was an ignoramus, Mumble was for learning famous. Mumble said one day to Dumble: "Ignorance should be more humble. Not a spark have you of knowledge That was got in any college." Dumble said to Mumble:  "Truly You're self-satisfied unduly. Of things in college I'm denied
Having a strong sense of one's own merit, coupled with a feeble conception of worth in others.  There was once a man in Ispahan Ever and ever so long ago, And he had a head, the phrenologists said, That fitted him for a show.  For his modesty's bump was so large a lump (Nature, they said, had taken a freak) That its summit stood far above the wood Of his hair, like a mountain peak.  So modest a man
Inexpedient.  Whatever in the long run and with regard to the greater number of instances men find to be generally inexpedient comes to be considered wrong, wicked, immoral.  If man's notions of right and wrong have any other basis than this of expediency; if they originated, or could have originated, in any other way; if actions have in themselves a moral character apart from, and nowise dependent on, their consequences--then all philosophy is a lie and reason a
In popular usage to pierce with any weapon which remains fixed in the wound.  This, however, is inaccurate; to impale is, properly, to put to death by thrusting an upright sharp stake into the body, the victim being left in a sitting position.  This was a common mode of punishment among many of the nations of antiquity, and is still in high favor in China and other parts of Asia.  Down to the beginning of the fifteenth century it was widely employed in
The act of blessing or consecrating by the laying on of hands--a ceremony common to many ecclesiastical systems, but performed with the frankest sincerity by the sect known as Thieves.  "Lo! by the laying on of hands," Say parson, priest and dervise, "We consecrate your cash and lands To ecclesiastical service. No doubt you'll swear till all is blue At such an imposition.  Do."  Pollo Doncas   IMPOSTOR n.
  His tale he told with a solemn face And a tender, melancholy grace. Improbable 'twas, no doubt, When you came to think it out, But the fascinated crowd Their deep surprise avowed And all with a single voice averred 'Twas the most amazing thing they'd heard-- All save one who spake never a word, But sat as mum As if deaf and dumb, Serene, indifferent and unstirred. Then all the others turned to him And scrutinized
Not competent to be considered.  Said of certain kinds of testimony which juries are supposed to be unfit to be entrusted with, and which judges, therefore, rule out, even of proceedings before themselves alone.  Hearsay evidence is inadmissible because the person quoted was unsworn and is not before the court for examination; yet most momentous actions, military, political, commercial and of every other kind, are daily undertaken on hearsay evidence.  There is no religion in the
The natural and rational gauge and measure of respectability, the commonly accepted standards being artificial, arbitrary and fallacious; for, as "Sir Sycophas Chrysolater" in the play has justly remarked, "the true use and function of property (in whatsoever it consisteth--coins, or land, or houses, or merchant-stuff, or anything which may be named as holden of right to one's own subservience) as also of honors, titles, preferments
In matrimony a similarity of tastes, particularly the taste for domination.  Incompatibility may, however, consist of a meek-eyed matron living just around the corner.  It has even been known to wear a moustache. 
Unable to exist if something else exists.  Two things are incompossible when the world of being has scope enough for one of them, but not enough for both--as Walt Whitman's poetry and God's mercy to man.  Incompossibility, it will be seen, is only incompatibility let loose.  Instead of such low language as "Go heel yourself--I mean to kill you on sight," the words, "Sir, we are incompossible," would convey an equally significant intim
One of a race of highly improper demons who, though probably not wholly extinct, may be said to have seen their best nights.  For a complete account of _incubi_ and _succubi_, including _incubae_ and _succubae_, see the _Liber Demonorum_ of Protassus (Paris, 1328), which contains much curious information that would be out of place in a dictionary intended as a text-book for the public schools. 
The chief element of success; "for whereas," saith Sir Thomas Brewbold, "there is but one way to do nothing and divers way to do something, whereof, to a surety, only one is the right way, it followeth that he who from indecision standeth still hath not so many chances of going astray as he who pusheth forwards"--a most clear and satisfactory exposition of the matter.  "Your prompt decision to attack," said General Grant on
Imperfectly sensible to distinctions among things.  "You tiresome man!" cried Indolentio's wife, "You've grown indifferent to all in life." "Indifferent?" he drawled with a slow smile; "I would be, dear, but it is not worth while."  Apuleius M. Gokul  
A disease which the patient and his friends frequently mistake for deep religious conviction and concern for the salvation of mankind.  As the simple Red Man of the western wild put it, with, it must be confessed, a certain force:  "Plenty well, no pray; big bellyache, heap God." 
[Latin]  Among the Greeks and Romans, sacrifices for propitiation of the _Dii Manes_, or souls of the dead heroes; for the pious ancients could not invent enough gods to satisfy their spiritual needs, and had to have a number of makeshift deities, or, as a sailor might say, jury-gods, which they made out of the most unpromising materials.  It was while sacrificing a bullock to the spirit of Agamemnon that Laia
In New York, one who does not believe in the Christian religion; in Constantinople, one who does.  (See GIAOUR.)  A kind of scoundrel imperfectly reverent of, and niggardly contributory to, divines, ecclesiastics, popes, parsons, canons, monks, mollahs, voodoos, presbyters, hierophants, prelates, obeah-men, abbes, nuns, missionaries,
One who ventures to believe that Adam need not have sinned unless he had a mind to--in opposition to the Supralapsarians, who hold that that luckless person's fall was decreed from the beginning.  Infralapsarians are sometimes called Sublapsarians without material effect upon the importance and lucidity of their views about Adam.  Two theologues once, as they wended their way To chapel, engaged in colloquial fray-- An earnest logomachy, bitter
One who receives a benefit from another, or is otherwise an object of charity.  "All men are ingrates," sneered the cynic.  "Nay," The good philanthropist replied; "I did great service to a man one day Who never since has cursed me to repay, Nor vilified."  "Ho!" cried the cynic, "lead me to him straight-- With veneration I am overcome, And fain would have his blessing."  "Sad your fate
A villainous compound of tannogallate of iron, gum-arabic and water, chiefly used to facilitate the infection of idiocy and promote intellectual crime.  The properties of ink are peculiar and contradictory:  it may be used to make reputations and unmake them; to blacken them and to make them white; but it is most generally and acceptably employed as a mortar to bind together the stones of an edifice of fame, and as a whitewash to
Natural, inherent--as innate ideas, that is to say, ideas that we are born with, having had them previously imparted to us.  The doctrine of innate ideas is one of the most admirable faiths of philosophy, being itself an innate idea and therefore inaccessible to disproof, though Locke foolishly supposed himself to have given it "a black eye."  Among innate ideas may be mentioned the belief in one's ability to conduct a newspaper, in the greatness of one's country, in the
Something written on another thing.  Inscriptions are of many kinds, but mostly memorial, intended to commemorate the fame of some illustrious person and hand down to distant ages the record of his services and virtues.  To this class of inscriptions belongs the name of John Smith, penciled on the Washington monument.  Following are examples of memorial inscriptions on tombstones:  (See EPITAPH.)  "In the sky my soul is found, And my body in the ground. By
  "See," cries the chorus of admiring preachers, "How Providence provides for all His creatures!" "His care," the gnat said, "even the insects follows: For us He has provided wrens and swallows."  Sempen Railey  
An ingenious modern game of chance in which the player is permitted to enjoy the comfortable conviction that he is beating the man who keeps the table.  INSURANCE AGENT:  My dear sir, that is a fine house--pray let me insure it. HOUSE OWNER:  With pleasure.  Please make the annual premium so low that by the time when, according to the tables of your actuary, it will probably be destroyed by fire I will have paid you considerably less than the
The period during which a monarchical country is governed by a warm spot on the cushion of the throne.  The experiment of letting the spot grow cold has commonly been attended by most unhappy results from the zeal of many worthy persons to make it warm again. 
A relation into which fools are providentially drawn for their mutual destruction.  Two Seidlitz powders, one in blue And one in white, together drew And having each a pleasant sense Of t'other powder's excellence, Forsook their jackets for the snug Enjoyment of a common mug. So close their intimacy grew One paper would have held the two. To confidences straight they fell, Less anxious each to hear than tell; Then each remorsefully confessed To all the virtues he
A social ceremony invented by the devil for the gratification of his servants and the plaguing of his enemies. The introduction attains its most malevolent development in this country, being, indeed, closely related to our political system. Every American being the equal of every other American, it follows that everybody has the right to know everybody else, which implies the right to introduce without request or permission. The Declaration of Independence should have read thus:  "We hold these truths to be self-evident:
The patriotism of a Scotchman.     J   J is a consonant in English, but some nations use it as a vowel-- than which nothing could be more absurd.  Its original form, which has been but slightly modified, was that of the tail of a subdued dog, and it was not a letter but a character, standing for a Latin verb, _jacere_, "to throw," because when a stone is thrown at a dog the dog's tail
An officer formerly attached to a king's household, whose business it was to amuse the court by ludicrous actions and utterances, the absurdity being attested by his motley costume.  The king himself being attired with dignity, it took the world some centuries to discover that his own conduct and decrees were sufficiently ridiculous for the amusement not only of his court but of all mankind.  The jester was commonly called a fool, but the poets and romancers have ever delighted to represent him as
A commodity which is a more or less adulterated condition the State sells to the citizen as a reward for his allegiance, taxes and personal service.     K   K is a consonant that we get from the Greeks, but it can be traced away back beyond them to the Cerathians, a small commercial nation inhabiting the peninsula of Smero.  In their tongue it was called _Klatch_, which means "destroyed."  The form of
  He willed away his whole estate, And then in death he fell asleep, Murmuring:  "Well, at any rate, My name unblemished I shall keep." But when upon the tomb 'twas wrought Whose was it?--for the dead keep naught.  Durang Gophel Arn  
A male person commonly known in America as a "crowned head," although he never wears a crown and has usually no head to speak of.  A king, in times long, long gone by, Said to his lazy jester: "If I were you and you were I My moments merrily would fly-- Nor care nor grief to pester."  "The reason, Sire, that you would thrive," The fool said--"if you'll hear it-- Is that of
A word invented by the poets as a rhyme for "bliss."  It is supposed to signify, in a general way, some kind of rite or ceremony appertaining to a good understanding; but the manner of its performance is unknown to this lexicographer. 
  Once a warrior gentle of birth, Then a person of civic worth, Now a fellow to move our mirth. Warrior, person, and fellow--no more: We must knight our dogs to get any lower. Brave Knights Kennelers then shall be, Noble Knights of the Golden Flea, Knights of the Order of St. Steboy, Knights of St. Gorge and Sir Knights Jawy. God speed the day when this knighting fad Shall go to the dogs and the
A part of the earth's surface, considered as property.  The theory that land is property subject to private ownership and control is the foundation of modern society, and is eminently worthy of the superstructure.  Carried to its logical conclusion, it means that some have the right to prevent others from living; for the right to own implies the right exclusively to occupy; and in fact laws of trespass are enacted wherever property in land is recognized.  It follows that if the whole area of _
A famous piece of antique scripture representing a priest of that name and his two sons in the folds of two enormous serpents. The skill and diligence with which the old man and lads support the serpents and keep them up to their work have been justly regarded as one of the noblest artistic illustrations of the mastery of human intelligence over brute inertia. 
One of the most important organs of the female system--an admirable provision of nature for the repose of infancy, but chiefly useful in rural festivities to support plates of cold chicken and heads of adult males.  The male of our species has a rudimentary lap, imperfectly developed and in no way contributing to the animal's substantial welfare. 
A shoemaker's implement, named by a frowning Providence as opportunity to the maker of puns.  Ah, punster, would my lot were cast, Where the cobbler is unknown, So that I might forget his last And hear your own.  Gargo Repsky  
An interior convulsion, producing a distortion of the features and accompanied by inarticulate noises.  It is infectious and, though intermittent, incurable.  Liability to attacks of laughter is one of the characteristics distinguishing man from the animals-- these being not only inaccessible to the provocation of his example, but impregnable to the microbes having original jurisdiction in bestowal of the disease.  Whether laughter could be imparted to animals by inoculation from the human patient is a question that
Crowned with leaves of the laurel.  In England the Poet Laureate is an officer of the sovereign's court, acting as dancing skeleton at every royal feast and singing-mute at every royal funeral.  Of all incumbents of that high office, Robert Southey had the most notable knack at drugging the Samson of public joy and cutting his hair to the quick; and he had an artistic color-sense which enabled him so to blacken a public grief as to
  Once Law was sitting on the bench, And Mercy knelt a-weeping. "Clear out!" he cried, "disordered wench! Nor come before me creeping. Upon your knees if you appear, 'Tis plain your have no standing here."  Then Justice came.  His Honor cried: "_Your_ status?--devil seize you!" "_Amica curiae,_" she replied-- "Friend of the court, so please you." "Begone!"
A heavy blue-gray metal much used in giving stability to light lovers--particularly to those who love not wisely but other men's wives.  Lead is also of great service as a counterpoise to an argument of such weight that it turns the scale of debate the wrong way.  An interesting fact in the chemistry of international controversy is that at the point of contact of two patriotisms lead is precipitated in great quantities.  Hail, holy Lead!--of human feuds the great And universal
Unlike a menagerie lion.  Leonine verses are those in which a word in the middle of a line rhymes with a word at the end, as in this famous passage from Bella Peeler Silcox:  The electric light invades the dunnest deep of Hades. Cries Pluto, 'twixt his snores:  "O tempora! O mores!"  It should be explained that Mrs. Silcox does not undertake to teach pronunciation of the Greek and Latin
An herb of the genus _Lactuca_, "Wherewith," says that pious gastronome, Hengist Pelly, "God has been pleased to reward the good and punish the wicked.  For by his inner light the righteous man has discerned a manner of compounding for it a dressing to the appetency whereof a multitude of gustible condiments conspire, being reconciled and ameliorated with profusion of oil, the entire comestible making glad
An enormous aquatic animal mentioned by Job.  Some suppose it to have been the whale, but that distinguished ichthyologer, Dr. Jordan, of Stanford University, maintains with considerable heat that it was a species of gigantic Tadpole (_Thaddeus Polandensis_) or Polliwig--_Maria pseudo-hirsuta_.  For an exhaustive description and history of the Tadpole consult the famous monograph of Jane Potter, _Thaddeus of Warsaw_. 
A pestilent fellow who, under the pretense of recording some particular stage in the development of a language, does what he can to arrest its growth, stiffen its flexibility and mechanize its methods.  For your lexicographer, having written his dictionary, comes to be considered "as one having authority," whereas his function is only to make a record, not to give a law.  The natural servility of the human understanding having invested him with judicial power, surrenders its
One of Imagination's most precious possessions.  The rising People, hot and out of breath, Roared around the palace:  "Liberty or death!" "If death will do," the King said, "let me reign; You'll have, I'm sure, no reason to complain."  Martha Braymance  
A useful functionary, not infrequently found editing a newspaper.  In his character of editor he is closely allied to the blackmailer by the tie of occasional identity; for in truth the lickspittle is only the blackmailer under another aspect, although the latter is frequently found as an independent species.  Lickspittling is more detestable than blackmailing, precisely as the business of a confidence man is more detestable than that of a highway robber; and the parallel
A spiritual pickle preserving the body from decay.  We live in daily apprehension of its loss; yet when lost it is not missed. The question, "Is life worth living?" has been much discussed; particularly by those who think it is not, many of whom have written at great length in support of their view and by careful observance of the laws of health enjoyed for long terms of years the honors of successful controversy.  "Life's not worth living, and that's the truth,"
The branch of a tree or the leg of an American woman.  'Twas a pair of boots that the lady bought, And the salesman laced them tight To a very remarkable height-- Higher, indeed, than I think he ought-- Higher than _can_ be right. For the Bible declares--but never mind: It is hardly fit To censure freely and fault to find With others for sins that I'm not inclined Myself to commit. Each has his weakness, and though my own
A large red organ thoughtfully provided by nature to be bilious with.  The sentiments and emotions which every literary anatomist now knows to haunt the heart were anciently believed to infest the liver; and even Gascoygne, speaking of the emotional side of human nature, calls it "our hepaticall parte."  It was at one time considered the seat of life; hence its name--liver, the thing we live with.  The liver is heaven
The art of thinking and reasoning in strict accordance with the limitations and incapacities of the human misunderstanding.  The basic of logic is the syllogism, consisting of a major and a minor premise and a conclusion--thus:  _Major Premise_:  Sixty men can do a piece of work sixty times as quickly as one man.  _Minor Premise_:  One man can dig a posthole in sixty seconds; therefore--  _Conclusion_:  Sixty men
A war in which the weapons are words and the wounds punctures in the swim-bladder of self-esteem--a kind of contest in which, the vanquished being unconscious of defeat, the victor is denied the reward of success.  'Tis said by divers of the scholar-men That poor Salmasius died of Milton's pen. Alas! we cannot know if this is true, For reading Milton's wit we perish too. 
Uncommon extension of the fear of death.  LOOKING-GLASS, n.  A vitreous plane upon which to display a fleeting show for man's disillusion given.  The King of Manchuria had a magic looking-glass, whereon whoso looked saw, not his own image, but only that of the king.  A certain courtier who had long enjoyed the king's favor and was thereby enriched beyond any other subject of the realm, said to the king: "
In American society, an English tourist above the state of a costermonger, as, lord 'Aberdasher, Lord Hartisan and so forth.  The traveling Briton of lesser degree is addressed as "Sir," as, Sir 'Arry Donkiboi, or 'Amstead 'Eath.  The word "Lord" is sometimes used, also, as a title of the Supreme Being; but this is thought to be rather flattery than true reverence. 
Learning--particularly that sort which is not derived from a regular course of instruction but comes of the reading of occult books, or by nature.  This latter is commonly designated as folk-lore and embraces popularly myths and superstitions.  In Baring-Gould's _Curious Myths of the Middle Ages_ the reader will find many of these traced backward, through various peoples on converging lines, toward a common origin in remote antiquity.  Among these are the fables of "
Privation of that which we had, or had not.  Thus, in the latter sense, it is said of a defeated candidate that he "lost his election"; and of that eminent man, the poet Gilder, that he has "lost his mind."  It is in the former and more legitimate sense, that the word is used in the famous epitaph:  Here Huntington's ashes long have lain Whose loss is our eternal gain, For while he exercised all his powers
A temporary insanity curable by marriage or by removal of the patient from the influences under which he incurred the disorder. This disease, like _caries_ and many other ailments, is prevalent only among civilized races living under artificial conditions; barbarous nations breathing pure air and eating simple food enjoy immunity from its ravages.  It is sometimes fatal, but more frequently to the physician than to the patient.  LOW-BRED, adj.  "Raised" instead of brought up. 
An inhabitant of the moon, as distinguished from Lunatic, one whom the moon inhabits.  The Lunarians have been described by Lucian, Locke and other observers, but without much agreement.  For example, Bragellos avers their anatomical identity with Man, but Professor Newcomb says they are more like the hill tribes of Vermont. 
An ancient instrument of torture.  The word is now used in a figurative sense to denote the poetic faculty, as in the following fiery lines of our great poet, Ella Wheeler Wilcox:  I sit astride Parnassus with my lyre, And pick with care the disobedient wire. That stupid shepherd lolling on his crook With deaf attention scarcely deigns to look. I bide my time, and it shall come at length, When, with
The method employed by one's opponents in baffling one's open and honorable efforts to do the right thing.  So plain the advantages of machination It constitutes a moral obligation, And honest wolves who think upon't with loathing Feel bound to don the sheep's deceptive clothing. So prospers still the diplomatic art, And Satan bows, with hand upon his heart.  R.S.K.  
One forgotten of the gods and living to a great age. History is abundantly supplied with examples, from Methuselah to Old Parr, but some notable instances of longevity are less well known.  A Calabrian peasant named Coloni, born in 1753, lived so long that he had what he considered a glimpse of the dawn of universal peace. Scanavius relates that he knew an archbishop who was so old that he could remember a time when he did not deserve hanging.
Affected with a high degree of intellectual independence; not conforming to standards of thought, speech and action derived by the conformants from study of themselves; at odds with the majority; in short, unusual.  It is noteworthy that persons are pronounced mad by officials destitute of evidence that themselves are sane.  For illustration, this present (and illustrious) lexicographer is no firmer in the faith of his own sanity than is any inmate of any madhouse in the land; yet
An inhabitant of Magdala.  Popularly, a woman found out.  This definition of the word has the authority of ignorance, Mary of Magdala being another person than the penitent woman mentioned by St. Luke.  It has also the official sanction of the governments of Great Britain and the United States.  In England the word is pronounced Maudlin, whence maudlin, adjective, unpleasantly sentimental.  With their Maudlin for Magdalene
Size.  Magnitude being purely relative, nothing is large and nothing small.  If everything in the universe were increased in bulk one thousand diameters nothing would be any larger than it was before, but if one thing remain unchanged all the others would be larger than they had been.  To an understanding familiar with the relativity of magnitude and distance the spaces and masses of the astronomer would be no more impressive than those of the microscopist. For anything we know to the contrary, the visible universe
A young person of the unfair sex addicted to clewless conduct and views that madden to crime.  The genus has a wide geographical distribution, being found wherever sought and deplored wherever found.  The maiden is not altogether unpleasing to the eye, nor (without her piano and her views) insupportable to the ear, though in respect to comeliness distinctly inferior to the rainbow, and, with regard to the part of her that is audible, bleaten out of
The state and title of a king.  Regarded with a just contempt by the Most Eminent Grand Masters, Grand Chancellors, Great Incohonees and Imperial Potentates of the ancient and honorable orders of republican America. 
Pertaining to Malthus and his doctrines.  Malthus believed in artificially limiting population, but found that it could not be done by talking.  One of the most practical exponents of the Malthusian idea was Herod of Judea, though all the famous soldiers have been of the same way of thinking. 
The god of the world's leading religion.  The chief temple is in the holy city of New York.  He swore that all other religions were gammon, And wore out his knees in the worship of Mammon.  Jared Oopf  
An animal so lost in rapturous contemplation of what he thinks he is as to overlook what he indubitably ought to be.  His chief occupation is extermination of other animals and his own species, which, however, multiplies with such insistent rapidity as to infest the whole habitable earth and Canada.  When the world was young and Man was new, And everything was pleasant, Distinctions Nature never drew 'Mongst kings and priest and peasant. We're not that way at
One of the sauces which serve the French in place of a state religion.  ME, pro.  The objectionable case of I.  The personal pronoun in English has three cases, the dominative, the objectionable and the oppressive.  Each is all three. 
To proceed sinuously and aimlessly.  The word is the ancient name of a river about one hundred and fifty miles south of Troy, which turned and twisted in the effort to get out of hearing when the Greeks and Trojans boasted of their prowess. 
A small metal disk given as a reward for virtues, attainments or services more or less authentic.  It is related of Bismark, who had been awarded a medal for gallantly rescuing a drowning person, that, being asked the meaning of the medal, he replied:  "I save lives sometimes."  And sometimes he didn't. 
Uncommon patience in planning a revenge that is worth while.  M is for Moses, Who slew the Egyptian. As sweet as a rose is The meekness of Moses. No monument shows his Post-mortem inscription, But M is for Moses Who slew the Egyptian.  _The Biographical Alphabet_ 
(Literally, seafoam, and by many erroneously supposed to be made of it.)  A fine white clay, which for convenience in coloring it brown is made into tobacco pipes and smoked by the workmen engaged in that industry.  The purpose of coloring it has not been disclosed by the manufacturers.  There was a youth (you've heard before, This woeful tale, may be), Who bought a meerschaum pipe and swore That color it would he!  He
A mysterious form of matter secreted by the brain.  Its chief activity consists in the endeavor to ascertain its own nature, the futility of the attempt being due to the fact that it has nothing but itself to know itself with.  From the Latin _mens_, a fact unknown to that honest shoe-seller, who, observing that his learned competitor over the way had displayed the motto "_Mens conscia recti_," emblazoned his own front with the words "Men
An infraction of the law having less dignity than a felony and constituting no claim to admittance into the best criminal society.  By misdemeanors he essays to climb Into the aristocracy of crime. O, woe was him!--with manner chill and grand "Captains of industry" refused his hand, "Kings of finance" denied him recognition And "railway magnates" jeered his low condition. He robbed a bank to make himself respected. They still rebuffed him, for
The title with which we brand unmarried women to indicate that they are in the market.  Miss, Missis (Mrs.) and Mister (Mr.) are the three most distinctly disagreeable words in the language, in sound and sense.  Two are corruptions of Mistress, the other of Master.  In the general abolition of social titles in this our country they miraculously escaped to plague us.  If we must have them let us be consistent and give one to the unmarried man.  I
The ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  It is distinguished from the corpuscle, also the ultimate, indivisible unit of matter, by a closer resemblance to the atom, also the ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  Three great scientific theories of the structure of the universe are the molecular, the corpuscular and the atomic.  A fourth affirms, with Haeckel, the condensation of precipitation of matter from ether--whose existence is proved by the condensation
The ultimate, indivisible unit of matter.  (See _Molecule_.)  According to Leibnitz, as nearly as he seems willing to be understood, the monad has body without bulk, and mind without manifestation--Leibnitz knows him by the innate power of considering.  He has founded upon him a theory of the universe, which the creature bears without resentment, for the monad is a gentleman. Small as he is, the monad contains all
A person engaged in reigning.  Formerly the monarch ruled, as the derivation of the word attests, and as many subjects have had occasion to learn.  In Russia and the Orient the monarch has still a considerable influence in public affairs and in the disposition of the human head, but in western Europe political administration is mostly entrusted to his ministers, he being somewhat preoccupied with reflections relating to the status of his own head.  MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT, n.  Government
Composed of words of one syllable, for literary babes who never tire of testifying their delight in the vapid compound by appropriate googoogling.  The words are commonly Saxon--that is to say, words of a barbarous people destitute of ideas and incapable of any but the most elementary sentiments and emotions.  The man who writes in Saxon Is the man to use an ax on  Judibras  
A structure intended to commemorate something which either needs no commemoration or cannot be commemorated.  The bones of Agammemnon are a show, And ruined is his royal monument,  but Agammemnon's fame suffers no diminution in consequence.  The monument custom has its _reductiones ad absurdum_ in monuments "to the unknown dead"--that is to say, monuments to perpetuate the memory of those who have left no memory. 
Conforming to a local and mutable standard of right. Having the quality of general expediency.  It is sayd there be a raunge of mountaynes in the Easte, on one syde of the which certayn conducts are immorall, yet on the other syde they are holden in good esteeme; wherebye the mountayneer is much conveenyenced, for it is given to him to goe downe eyther way and act as it
An animal which strews its path with fainting women.  As in Rome Christians were thrown to the lions, so centuries earlier in Otumwee, the most ancient and famous city of the world, female heretics were thrown to the mice.  Jakak-Zotp, the historian, the only Otumwump whose writings have descended to us, says that these martyrs met their death with little dignity and much exertion.  He even attempts to exculp
A crowd; the source of political wisdom and virtue.  In a republic, the object of the statesman's adoration.  "In a multitude of counsellors there is wisdom," saith the proverb.  If many men of equal individual wisdom are wiser than any one of them, it must be that they acquire the excess of wisdom by the mere act of getting together.  Whence comes it?  Obviously from nowhere--as well say that a range of mountains is higher than
An ancient Egyptian, formerly in universal use among modern civilized nations as medicine, and now engaged in supplying art with an excellent pigment.  He is handy, too, in museums in gratifying the vulgar curiosity that serves to distinguish man from the lower animals.  By means of the Mummy, mankind, it is said, Attests to the gods its respect for the dead. We plunder his tomb, be he sinner or saint, Distil him for physic and grind him for paint, Exhibit
A drink served at banquets of the Olympian deities.  The secret of its preparation is lost, but the modern Kentuckians believe that they come pretty near to a knowledge of its chief ingredient.  Juno drank a cup of nectar, But the draught did not affect her. Juno drank a cup of rye-- Then she bad herself good-bye.  J.G.  
The _piece de resistance_ in the American political problem.  Representing him by the letter n, the Republicans begin to build their equation thus:  "Let n = the white man."  This, however, appears to give an unsatisfactory solution. 
A stench in the ear.  Undomesticated music.  The chief product and authenticating sign of civilization.  NOMINATE, v.  To designate for the heaviest political assessment.  To put forward a suitable person to incur the mudgobbing and deadcatting of the opposition. 
The extreme outpost of the face.  From the circumstance that great conquerors have great noses, Getius, whose writings antedate the age of humor, calls the nose the organ of quell.  It has been observed that one's nose is never so happy as when thrust into the affairs of others, from which some physiologists have drawn the inference that the nose is devoid of the sense of smell.  There's a man with a Nose, And wherever he goes The people run from
That which exists, as distinguished from that which merely seems to exist, the latter being a phenomenon.  The noumenon is a bit difficult to locate; it can be apprehended only be a process of reasoning--which is a phenomenon.  Nevertheless, the discovery and exposition of noumena offer a rich field for what Lewes calls "the endless variety and excitement of philosophic thought."  Hurrah (therefore) for the noumenon! 
A short story padded.  A species of composition bearing the same relation to literature that the panorama bears to art.  As it is too long to be read at a sitting the impressions made by its successive parts are successively effaced, as in the panorama.  Unity, totality of effect, is impossible; for besides the few pages last read all that is carried in mind is the mere plot of what has gone before. To the romance the novel is what photography is to painting.
The state or condition in which the wicked cease from struggling and the dreary are at rest.  Fame's eternal dumping ground. Cold storage for high hopes.  A place where ambitious authors meet their works without pride and their betters without envy.  A dormitory without an alarm clock. 
A place where astronomers conjecture away the guesses of their predecessors.  OBSESSED, p.p.  Vexed by an evil spirit, like the Gadarene swine and other critics.  Obsession was once more common than it is now. Arasthus tells of a peasant who was occupied by a different devil for every day in the week, and on Sundays by two.  They were frequently seen, always walking in his shadow, when he had one, but were
No longer used by the timid.  Said chiefly of words. A word which some lexicographer has marked obsolete is ever thereafter an object of dread and loathing to the fool writer, but if it is a good word and has no exact modern equivalent equally good, it is good enough for the good writer.  Indeed, a writer's attitude toward "obsolete" words is as true a measure of his literary ability as anything except the character of his work.  A dictionary of obsolete and
Afflicting us with greater or less frequency.  That, however, is not the sense in which the word is used in the phrase "occasional verses," which are verses written for an "occasion," such as an anniversary, a celebration or other event.  True, they afflict us a little worse than other sorts of verse, but their name has no reference to irregular recurrence. 
The part of the world lying west (or east) of the Orient.  It is largely inhabited by Christians, a powerful subtribe of the Hypocrites, whose principal industries are murder and cheating, which they are pleased to call "war" and "commerce."  These, also, are the principal industries of the Orient. 
Generating disagreeable emotions or sensations, as the advance of an army against its enemy.  "Were the enemy's tactics offensive?" the king asked.  "I should say so!" replied the unsuccessful general.  "The blackguard wouldn't come out of his works!" 
In that stage of usefulness which is not inconsistent with general inefficiency, as an _old man_.  Discredited by lapse of time and offensive to the popular taste, as an _old_ book.  "Old books?  The devil take them!" Goby said. "Fresh every day must be my books and bread." Nature herself approves the Goby rule And gives us every moment a fresh fool.  Harley Shum  
Oily, smooth, sleek.  Disraeli once described the manner of Bishop Wilberforce as "unctuous, oleaginous, saponaceous."  And the good prelate was ever afterward known as Soapy Sam.  For every man there is something in the vocabulary that would stick to him like a second skin.  His enemies have only to find it. 
Relating to a mountain in Thessaly, once inhabited by gods, now a repository of yellowing newspapers, beer bottles and mutilated sardine cans, attesting the presence of the tourist and his appetite.  His name the smirking tourist scrawls Upon Minerva's temple walls, Where thundered once Olympian Zeus, And marks his appetite's abuse.  Averil Joop  
A play representing life in another world, whose inhabitants have no speech but song, no motions but gestures and no postures but attitudes.  All acting is simulation, and the word _simulation_ is from _simia_, an ape; but in opera the actor takes for his model _Simia audibilis_ (or _Pithecanthropos stentor_)--the ape that howls.  The actor apes a man--at least in shape; The opera
A favorable occasion for grasping a disappointment.  OPPOSE, v.  To assist with obstructions and objections.  How lonely he who thinks to vex With bandinage the Solemn Sex! Of levity, Mere Man, beware; None but the Grave deserve the Unfair.  Percy P. Orminder  
In politics the party that prevents the Government from running amuck by hamstringing it.  The King of Ghargaroo, who had been abroad to study the science of government, appointed one hundred of his fattest subjects as members of a parliament to make laws for the collection of revenue.  Forty of these he named the Party of Opposition and had his Prime Minister carefully instruct them in their duty of opposing every royal measure. Nevertheless, the first one that was submitted passed unanimously. Greatly disple
The doctrine, or belief, that everything is beautiful, including what is ugly, everything good, especially the bad, and everything right that is wrong.  It is held with greatest tenacity by those most accustomed to the mischance of falling into adversity, and is most acceptably expounded with the grin that apes a smile.  Being a blind faith, it is inaccessible to the light of disproof--an intellectual disorder, yielding to no treatment but death.  It is hereditary, but fortunately
A proponent of the doctrine that black is white.  A pessimist applied to God for relief.  "Ah, you wish me to restore your hope and cheerfulness," said God.  "No," replied the petitioner, "I wish you to create something that would justify them."  "The world is all created," said God, "but you have overlooked something--the mortality of the optimist." 
A living person whom death has deprived of the power of filial ingratitude--a privation appealing with a particular eloquence to all that is sympathetic in human nature.  When young the orphan is commonly sent to an asylum, where by careful cultivation of its rudimentary sense of locality it is taught to know its place.  It is then instructed in the arts of dependence and servitude and eventually turned loose to prey upon the world as a bootblack or scullery maid. 
The science of spelling by the eye instead of the ear.  Advocated with more heat than light by the outmates of every asylum for the insane.  They have had to concede a few things since the time of Chaucer, but are none the less hot in defence of those to be conceded hereafter.  A spelling reformer indicted For fudge was before the court cicted. The judge said:  "Enough-- His candle we'll snough, And his sepulchre shall
A large bird to which (for its sins, doubtless) nature has denied that hinder toe in which so many pious naturalists have seen a conspicuous evidence of design.  The absence of a good working pair of wings is no defect, for, as has been ingeniously pointed out, the ostrich does not fly.  OTHERWISE, adv.  No better. 
A particular type of disappointment.  By the kind of intelligence that sees in an exception a proof of the rule the wisdom of an act is judged by the outcome, the result.  This is immortal nonsense; the wisdom of an act is to be judged by the light that the doer had when he performed it. 
To make an enemy.  OUT-OF-DOORS, n.  That part of one's environment upon which no government has been able to collect taxes.  Chiefly useful to inspire poets.  I climbed to the top of a mountain one day To see the sun setting in glory, And I thought, as I looked at his vanishing ray, Of a perfectly splendid story.  'Twas about an old man and the ass he bestrode Till the strength of the beast was
In ancient Rome, a definite, formal pageant in honor of one who had been disserviceable to the enemies of the nation.  A lesser "triumph."  In modern English the word is improperly used to signify any loose and spontaneous expression of popular homage to the hero of the hour and place.  "I had an ovation!" the actor man said, But I thought it uncommonly queer, That people and critics by him had been led By the ear.  The Latin lexicon
A dangerous disorder affecting high public functionaries who want to go fishing.  OWE, v.  To have (and to hold) a debt.  The word formerly signified not indebtedness, but possession; it meant "own," and in the minds of debtors there is still a good deal of confusion between assets and liabilities. 
The art of protecting flat surfaces from the weather and exposing them to the critic.  Formerly, painting and sculpture were combined in the same work: the ancients painted their statues.  The only present alliance between the two arts is that the modern painter chisels his patrons. 
A fine and costly residence, particularly that of a great official.  The residence of a high dignitary of the Christian Church is called a palace; that of the Founder of his religion was known as a field, or wayside.  There is progress. 
A species of tree having several varieties, of which the familiar "itching palm" (_Palma hominis_) is most widely distributed and sedulously cultivated.  This noble vegetable exudes a kind of invisible gum, which may be detected by applying to the bark a piece of gold or silver.  The metal will adhere with remarkable tenacity. The fruit of the itching palm is so bitter and unsatisfying that a considerable percentage of it is sometimes given away in what are known as "benefactions
The 947th method (according to Mimbleshaw's classification) of obtaining money by false pretences.  It consists in "reading character" in the wrinkles made by closing the hand.  The pretence is not altogether false; character can really be read very accurately in this way, for the wrinkles in every hand submitted plainly spell the word "dupe."  The imposture consists in not reading it aloud. 
Literally, the Place of All the Demons.  Most of them have escaped into politics and finance, and the place is now used as a lecture hall by the Audible Reformer.  When disturbed by his voice the ancient echoes clamor appropriate responses most gratifying to his pride of distinction. 
A nether habiliment of the adult civilized male.  The garment is tubular and unprovided with hinges at the points of flexion.  Supposed to have been invented by a humorist.  Called "trousers" by the enlightened and "pants" by the unworthy. 
A play in which the story is told without violence to the language.  The least disagreeable form of dramatic action.  PARDON, v.  To remit a penalty and restore to the life of crime.  To add to the lure of crime the temptation of ingratitude. 
That part of Eternity with some small fraction of which we have a slight and regrettable acquaintance.  A moving line called the Present parts it from an imaginary period known as the Future.  These two grand divisions of Eternity, of which the one is continually effacing the other, are entirely unlike.  The one is dark with sorrow and disappointment, the other bright with prosperity and joy.  The Past is the region of sobs, the Future is the realm of song.  In the one
Combustible rubbish ready to the torch of any one ambitious to illuminate his name.  In Dr. Johnson's famous dictionary patriotism is defined as the last resort of a scoundrel.  With all due respect to an enlightened but inferior lexicographer I beg to submit that it is the first. 
In international affairs, a period of cheating between two periods of fighting.  O, what's the loud uproar assailing Mine ears without cease? 'Tis the voice of the hopeful, all-hailing The horrors of peace.  Ah, Peace Universal; they woo it-- Would marry it, too. If only they knew how to do it 'Twere easy to do.  They're working by night and by day On their problem, like moles. Have mercy, O Heaven
An imaginary state of quality distinguished from the actual by an element known as excellence; an attribute of the critic.  The editor of an English magazine having received a letter pointing out the erroneous nature of his views and style, and signed "Perfection," promptly wrote at the foot of the letter:  "I don't agree with you," and mailed it to Matthew Arnold. 
Walking about.  Relating to the philosophy of Aristotle, who, while expounding it, moved from place to place in order to avoid his pupil's objections.  A needless precaution--they knew no more of the matter than he. 
A lowly virtue whereby mediocrity achieves an inglorious success.  "Persevere, persevere!" cry the homilists all, Themselves, day and night, persevering to bawl. "Remember the fable of tortoise and hare-- The one at the goal while the other is--where?" Why, back there in Dreamland, renewing his lease Of life, all his muscles preserving the peace, The goal and the rival forgotten alike, And the long
The art of determining the character of another by the resemblances and differences between his face and our own, which is the standard of excellence.  "There is no art," says Shakespeare, foolish man, "To read the mind's construction in the face." The physiognomists his portrait scan, And say:  "How little wisdom here we trace! He knew his face disclosed his mind and heart, So, in his own defence, denied our art."  Lavatar Shunk
A representation in two dimensions of something wearisome in three.  "Behold great Daubert's picture here on view-- Taken from Life."  If that description's true, Grant, heavenly Powers, that I be taken, too.  Jali Hane  
An advance agent of the reaper whose name is Indigestion.  Cold pie was highly esteemed by the remains.  Rev. Dr. Mucker  (in a funeral sermon over a British nobleman)  Cold pie is a detestable American comestible. That's why I'm done--or undone-- So far from that dear London.  (from the headstone of a British nobleman in Kalamazoo)  
One of a tribe of very small men found by ancient travelers in many parts of the world, but by modern in Central Africa only.  The Pigmies are so called to distinguish them from the bulkier Caucasians --who are Hogmies. 
A traveler that is taken seriously.  A Pilgrim Father was one who, leaving Europe in 1620 because not permitted to sing psalms through his nose, followed it to Massachusetts, where he could personate God according to the dictates of his conscience. 
In ancient times a general punishment of the innocent for admonition of their ruler, as in the familiar instance of Pharaoh the Immune.  The plague as we of to-day have the happiness to know it is merely Nature's fortuitous manifestation of her purposeless objectionableness. 
The fundamental element and special glory of popular literature. A thought that snores in words that smoke.  The wisdom of a million fools in the diction of a dullard.  A fossil sentiment in artificial rock.  A moral without the fable.  All that is mortal of a departed truth.  A demi-tasse of milk-and-mortality.  The Pope's-nose of a featherless peacock.  A jelly-fish withering on the shore
An implement that cries aloud for hands accustomed to the pen.  PLUNDER, v.  To take the property of another without observing the decent and customary reticences of theft.  To effect a change of ownership with the candid concomitance of a brass band.  To wrest the wealth of A from B and leave C lamenting a vanished opportunity. 
An eel in the fundamental mud upon which the superstructure of organized society is reared.  When he wriggles he mistakes the agitation of his tail for the trembling of the edifice. As compared with the statesman, he suffers the disadvantage of being alive. 
A fossil patriot of the early agricultural period, found in the old red soapstone underlying Kansas; characterized by an uncommon spread of ear, which some naturalists contend gave him the power of flight, though Professors Morse and Whitney, pursuing independent lines of thought, have ingeniously pointed out that had he possessed it he would have gone elsewhere.  In the picturesque speech of his period, some fragments of which have come down to us, he was known as "The Matter with Kansas." 
Exposed to a mutable ownership through vicissitudes of possession.  His light estate, if neither he did make it Nor yet its former guardian forsake it, Is portable improperty, I take it.  Worgum Slupsky  
Suitable for drinking.  Water is said to be potable; indeed, some declare it our natural beverage, although even they find it palatable only when suffering from the recurrent disorder known as thirst, for which it is a medicine.  Upon nothing has so great and diligent ingenuity been brought to bear in all ages and in all countries, except the most uncivilized, as upon the invention of substitutes for water.  To hold that this general aversion to that liquid has no basis in the
A file provided for the teeth of the rats of reform.  The number of plans for its abolition equals that of the reformers who suffer from it, plus that of the philosophers who know nothing about it.  Its victims are distinguished by possession of all the virtues and by their faith in leaders seeking to conduct them into a prosperity where they believe these to be unknown.  PRAY, v.  To ask that the laws of the universe be annulled in behalf of a single petitioner confessed
In Law, a previous decision, rule or practice which, in the absence of a definite statute, has whatever force and authority a Judge may choose to give it, thereby greatly simplifying his task of doing as he pleases.  As there are precedents for everything, he has only to ignore those that make against his interest and accentuate those in the line of his desire.  Invention of the precedent elevates the trial-at-law from the low estate of a fortuitous ordeal to
The doctrine that all things occur according to programme.  This doctrine should not be confused with that of foreordination, which means that all things are programmed, but does not affirm their occurrence, that being only an implication from other doctrines by which this is entailed.  The difference is great enough to have deluged Christendom with ink, to say nothing of the gore. With the distinction of the two doctrines kept well in mind, and a reverent belief in both, one may
A sentiment, or frame of mind, induced by the erroneous belief that one thing is better than another.  An ancient philosopher, expounding his conviction that life is no better than death, was asked by a disciple why, then, he did not die. "Because," he replied, "death is no better than life."  It is longer. 
Belonging to an early period and a museum. Antedating the art and practice of perpetuating falsehood.  He lived in a period prehistoric, When all was absurd and phantasmagoric. Born later, when Clio, celestial recorder, Set down great events in succession and order, He surely had seen nothing droll or fortuitous In anything here but the lies that she threw at us.  Orpheus Bowen  
Hideously appareled after the manner of the time and place.  In Boorioboola-Gha a man is presentable on occasions of ceremony if he have his abdomen painted a bright blue and wear a cow's tail; in New York he may, if it please him, omit the paint, but after sunset he must wear two tails made of the wool of a sheep and dyed black.  PRESIDE, v.  To guide the action of a deliberative body to
The leading figure in a small group of men of whom-- and of whom only--it is positively known that immense numbers of their countrymen did not want any of them for President.  If that's an honor surely 'tis a greater To have been a simple and undamned spectator. Behold in me a man of mark and note Whom no elector e'er denied a vote!-- An undiscredited, unhooted gent Who might, for all we know, be President By
The head of a church, especially a State church supported by involuntary contributions.  The Primate of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury, an amiable old gentleman, who occupies Lambeth Palace when living and Westminster Abbey when dead.  He is commonly dead. 
The rudimentary organ of an elephant which serves him in place of the knife-and-fork that Evolution has as yet denied him. For purposes of humor it is popularly called a trunk.  Asked how he knew that an elephant was going on a journey, the illustrious Jo. Miller cast a reproachful look upon his tormentor, and answered, absently:  "When it is ajar," and threw himself from a high promontory into the sea.  Thus perished in his
The final arbiter in international disputes.  Formerly these disputes were settled by physical contact of the disputants, with such simple arguments as the rudimentary logic of the times could supply--the sword, the spear, and so forth.  With the growth of prudence in military affairs the projectile came more and more into favor, and is now held in high esteem by the most courageous.  Its capital defect is that it requires personal attendance at the point of propulsion. 
Evidence having a shade more of plausibility than of unlikelihood.  The testimony of two credible witnesses as opposed to that of only one.  PROOF-READER, n.  A malefactor who atones for making your writing nonsense by permitting the compositor to make it unintelligible. 
Any material thing, having no particular value, that may be held by A against the cupidity of B.  Whatever gratifies the passion for possession in one and disappoints it in all others.  The object of man's brief rapacity and long indifference. 
An outlook, usually forbidding.  An expectation, usually forbidden.  Blow, blow, ye spicy breezes-- O'er Ceylon blow your breath, Where every prospect pleases, Save only that of death.  Bishop Sheber  
A portable sheath in which the ancient statesman and the aboriginal lawyer carried their lighter arguments.  He extracted from his quiver, Did the controversial Roman, An argument well fitted To the question as submitted, Then addressed it to the liver, Of the unpersuaded foeman.  Oglum P. Boomp  
Absurdly chivalric, like Don Quixote.  An insight into the beauty and excellence of this incomparable adjective is unhappily denied to him who has the misfortune to know that the gentleman's name is pronounced Ke-ho-tay.  When ignorance from out of our lives can banish Philology, 'tis folly to know Spanish.  Juan Smith  
A sufficient number of members of a deliberative body to have their own way and their own way of having it.  In the United States Senate a quorum consists of the chairman of the Committee on Finance and a messenger from the White House; in the House of Representatives, of the Speaker and the devil. 
The act of repeating erroneously the words of another. The words erroneously repeated.  Intent on making his quotation truer, He sought the page infallible of Brewer, Then made a solemn vow that he would be Condemned eternally.  Ah, me, ah, me!  Stumpo Gaker  
In a republic, those who exercise a supreme authority tempered by fraudulent elections.  The rabble is like the sacred Simurgh, of Arabian fable--omnipotent on condition that it do nothing.  (The word is Aristocratese, and has no exact equivalent in our tongue, but means, as nearly as may be, "soaring swine.") 
Relative elevation in the scale of human worth.  He held at court a rank so high That other noblemen asked why. "Because," 'twas answered, "others lack His skill to scratch the royal back."  Aramis Jukes  
A Welsh rabbit, in the speech of the humorless, who point out that it is not a rabbit.  To whom it may be solemnly explained that the comestible known as toad-in-a-hole is really not a toad, and that _riz-de-veau a la financiere_ is not the smile of a calf prepared after the recipe of a she banker. 
Insensible to the value of our advice.  "Now lay your bet with mine, nor let These gamblers take your cash." "Nay, this child makes no bet."  "Great snakes! How can you be so rash?"  Bootle P. Gish  
The radius of action of the human hand.  The area within which it is possible (and customary) to gratify directly the propensity to provide.  This is a truth, as old as the hills, That life and experience teach: The poor man suffers that keenest of ills, An impediment in his reach.  G.J.  
The general body of what one reads.  In our country it consists, as a rule, of Indiana novels, short stories in "dialect" and humor in slang.  We know by one's reading His learning and breeding; By what draws his laughter We know his Hereafter. Read nothing, laugh never-- The Sphinx was less clever!  Jupiter Muke  
The chief of many mechanical devices enabling us to get away from where we are to where we are no better off.  For this purpose the railroad is held in highest favor by the optimist, for it permits him to make the transit with great expedition. 
Pertaining to a certain order of architecture, otherwise known as the Normal American.  Most of the public buildings of the United States are of the Ramshackle order, though some of our earlier architects preferred the Ironic.  Recent additions to the White House in Washington are Theo-Doric, the ecclesiastic order of the Dorians.  They are exceedingly fine and cost one hundred dollars a brick. 
A person distinguishable from a civilian by his uniform and from a soldier by his gait.  Fresh from the farm or factory or street, His marching, in pursuit or in retreat, Were an impressive martial spectacle Except for two impediments--his feet.  Thompson Johnson  
Deliverance of sinners from the penalty of their sin, through their murder of the deity against whom they sinned.  The doctrine of Redemption is the fundamental mystery of our holy religion, and whoso believeth in it shall not perish, but have everlasting life in which to try to understand it.  We must awake Man's spirit from his sin, And take some special measure for redeeming it; Though hard indeed the task to get it in Among the angels any way but teaming it
Reparation without satisfaction.  Among the Anglo-Saxon a subject conceiving himself wronged by the king was permitted, on proving his injury, to beat a brazen image of the royal offender with a switch that was afterward applied to his own naked back.  The latter rite was performed by the public hangman, and it assured moderation in the plaintiff's choice of a switch.  RED-SKIN, n.  A North American Indian, whose skin is not red--at least not
Superfluous; needless; _de trop_.  The Sultan said:  "There's evidence abundant To prove this unbelieving dog redundant." To whom the Grand Vizier, with mien impressive, Replied:  "His head, at least, appears excessive."  Habeeb Suleiman   Mr. Debs is a redundant citizen.  Theodore Roosevelt  
An action of the mind whereby we obtain a clearer view of our relation to the things of yesterday and are able to avoid the perils that we shall not again encounter.  REFORM, v.  A thing that mostly satisfies reformers opposed to reformation. 
Anything assuring protection to one in peril.  Moses and Joshua provided six cities of refuge--Bezer, Golan, Ramoth, Kadesh, Schekem and Hebron--to which one who had taken life inadvertently could flee when hunted by relatives of the deceased.  This admirable expedient supplied him with wholesome exercise and enabled them to enjoy the pleasures of the chase; whereby the soul of the dead man was appropriately honored by observances akin to the funeral games of early Greece.
Denial of something desired; as an elderly maiden's hand in marriage, to a rich and handsome suitor; a valuable franchise to a rich corporation, by an alderman; absolution to an impenitent king, by a priest, and so forth.  Refusals are graded in a descending scale of finality thus:  the refusal absolute, the refusal conditional, the refusal tentative and the refusal feminine.  The last is called by some casuists the refusal assent
Distinguishing insignia, jewels and costume of such ancient and honorable orders as Knights of Adam; Visionaries of Detectable Bosh; the Ancient Order of Modern Troglodytes; the League of Holy Humbug; the Golden Phalanx of Phalangers; the Genteel Society of Expurgated Hoodlums; the Mystic Alliances of Gorgeous Regalians; Knights and Ladies of the Yellow Dog; the Oriental Order of Sons of the West; the Blatherhood
A daughter of Hope and Fear, explaining to Ignorance the nature of the Unknowable.  "What is your religion my son?" inquired the Archbishop of Rheims. "Pardon, monseigneur," replied Rochebriant; "I am ashamed of it." "Then why do you not become an atheist?" "Impossible!  I should be ashamed of atheism." "In that case, monsieur, you should join the Protestants." 
A receptacle for such sacred objects as pieces of the true cross, short-ribs of the saints, the ears of Balaam's ass, the lung of the cock that called Peter to repentance and so forth. Reliquaries are commonly of metal, and provided with a lock to prevent the contents from coming out and performing miracles at unseasonable times.  A feather from the wing of the Angel of the Annunciation once escaped during a sermon in Saint Peter's and so tickled
A degree of distinction between notoriety and fame--a little more supportable than the one and a little more intolerable than the other.  Sometimes it is conferred by an unfriendly and inconsiderate hand.  I touched the harp in every key, But found no heeding ear; And then Ithuriel touched me With a revealing spear.  Not all my genius, great as 'tis, Could urge me out of night. I felt the faint appulse of his, And leapt
The faithful attendant and follower of Punishment.  It is usually manifest in a degree of reformation that is not inconsistent with continuity of sin.  Desirous to avoid the pains of Hell, You will repent and join the Church, Parnell? How needless!--Nick will keep you off the coals And add you to the woes of other souls.  Jomater Abemy  
A reproduction of a work of art, by the artist that made the original.  It is so called to distinguish it from a "copy," which is made by another artist.  When the two are made with equal skill the replica is the more valuable, for it is supposed to be more beautiful than it looks. 
A writer who guesses his way to the truth and dispels it with a tempest of words.  "More dear than all my bosom knows, O thou Whose 'lips are sealed' and will not disavow!" So sang the blithe reporter-man as grew Beneath his hand the leg-long "interview."  Barson Maith   REPOSE, v.i.  To cease from troubling. 
In theology, the state of a luckless mortal prenatally damned.  The doctrine of reprobation was taught by Calvin, whose joy in it was somewhat marred by the sad sincerity of his conviction that although some are foredoomed to perdition, others are predestined to salvation. 
A nation in which, the thing governing and the thing governed being the same, there is only a permitted authority to enforce an optional obedience.  In a republic, the foundation of public order is the ever lessening habit of submission inherited from ancestors who, being truly governed, submitted because they had to. There are as many kinds of republics as there are graduations between the despotism whence they came and the anarchy whither they lead. 
To renounce an honor for an advantage.  To renounce an advantage for a greater advantage.  'Twas rumored Leonard Wood had signed A true renunciation Of title, rank and every kind Of military station-- Each honorable station.  By his example fired--inclined To noble emulation, The country humbly was resigned To Leonard's resignation-- His Christian resignation.  Politian Greame  
A suspension of hostilities against a sentenced assassin, to enable the Executive to determine whether the murder may not have been done by the prosecuting attorney.  Any break in the continuity of a disagreeable expectation.  Altgeld upon his incandescent bed Lay, an attendant demon at his head.  "O cruel cook, pray grant me some relief-- Some respite from the roast, however brief."  "Remember how on earth I pardoned all Your friends in Illinois when held in thrall
Like a simple American citizen beduking himself in his lodge, or affirming his consequence in the Scheme of Things as an elemental unit of a parade.  The Knights of Dominion were so resplendent in their velvet- and-gold that their masters would hardly have known them.  "Chronicles of the Classes"   RESPOND, v.i.  To make answer, or disclose otherwise a consciousness of having inspired an interest in what Herbert Spencer calls "external coexist
A detachable burden easily shifted to the shoulders of God, Fate, Fortune, Luck or one's neighbor.  In the days of astrology it was customary to unload it upon a star.  Alas, things ain't what we should see If Eve had let that apple be; And many a feller which had ought To set with monarchses of thought, Or play some rosy little game With battle-chaps on fields of fame, Is downed by his unlucky star And holl
A rain of fire-and-brimstone that falls alike upon the just and such of the unjust as have not procured shelter by evicting them.  In the lines following, addressed to an Emperor in exile by Father Gassalasca Jape, the reverend poet appears to hint his sense of the imprudence of turning about to face Retribution when it is taking exercise:  What, what! Dom Pedro, you desire to go Back to Brazil to end your days in
A signal to sleeping soldiers to dream of battlefields no more, but get up and have their blue noses counted.  In the American army it is ingeniously called "rev-e-lee," and to that pronunciation our countrymen have pledged their lives, their misfortunes and their sacred dishonor. 
In politics, an abrupt change in the form of misgovernment.  Specifically, in American history, the substitution of the rule of an Administration for that of a Ministry, whereby the welfare and happiness of the people were advanced a full half-inch. Revolutions are usually accompanied by a considerable effusion of blood, but are accounted worth it--this appraisement being made by beneficiaries whose blood had not the mischance to be shed.  The French revolution is of incalculable value to
Censorious language by oneself concerning another. The word is of classical refinement, and is even said to have been used in a fable by Georgius Coadjutor, one of the most fastidious writers of the fifteenth century--commonly, indeed, regarded as the founder of the Fastidiotic School.  RICE-WATER, n.  A mystic beverage secretly used by our most popular novelists and poets to regulate the imagination and narcotize the conscience. 
Holding in trust and subject to an accounting the property of the indolent, the incompetent, the unthrifty, the envious and the luckless.  That is the view that prevails in the underworld, where the Brotherhood of Man finds its most logical development and candid advocacy.  To denizens of the midworld the word means good and wise. 
  A gift from Heaven signifying, "This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased."  John D. Rockefeller   The reward of toil and virtue.  J.P. Morgan   The savings of many in the hands of one.  Eugene Debs  To these excellent definitions the inspired lexicographer feels that he can add nothing of value. 
Words designed to show that the person of whom they are uttered is devoid of the dignity of character distinguishing him who utters them.  It may be graphic, mimetic or merely rident. Shaftesbury is quoted as having pronounced it the test of truth--a ridiculous assertion, for many a solemn fallacy has undergone centuries of ridicule with no abatement of its popular acceptance. What, for example, has been more valorously derided than the doctrine of Infant Respectability? 
Legitimate authority to be, to do or to have; as the right to be a king, the right to do one's neighbor, the right to have measles, and the like.  The first of these rights was once universally believed to be derived directly from the will of God; and this is still sometimes affirmed _in partibus infidelium_ outside the enlightened realms of Democracy; as the well known lines of Sir Abednego Bink, following:  By what right,
A sturdy virtue that was once found among the Pantidoodles inhabiting the lower part of the peninsula of Oque.  Some feeble attempts were made by returned missionaries to introduce it into several European countries, but it appears to have been imperfectly expounded.  An example of this faulty exposition is found in the only extant sermon of the pious Bishop Rowley, a characteristic passage from which is here given:  "Now righteousness consisteth not merely in a holy state of mind, nor yet
A poet regarded with indifference or disesteem.  The rimer quenches his unheeded fires, The sound surceases and the sense expires. Then the domestic dog, to east and west, Expounds the passions burning in his breast. The rising moon o'er that enchanted land Pauses to hear and yearns to understand.  Mowbray Myles  
A popular entertainment given to the military by innocent bystanders.  R.I.P.  A careless abbreviation of _requiescat in pace_, attesting an indolent goodwill to the dead.  According to the learned Dr. Drigge, however, the letters originally meant nothing more than _reductus in pulvis_. 
A strip of land along which one may pass from where it is too tiresome to be to where it is futile to go.  All roads, howsoe'er they diverge, lead to Rome, Whence, thank the good Lord, at least one leads back home.  Borey the Bald  
A candid man of affairs. It is related of Voltaire that one night he and some traveling companion lodged at a wayside inn.  The surroundings were suggestive, and after supper they agreed to tell robber stories in turn.  "Once there was a Farmer-General of the Revenues."  Saying nothing more, he was encouraged to continue.  "That," he said, "is the story." 
Fiction that owes no allegiance to the God of Things as They Are.  In the novel the writer's thought is tethered to probability, as a domestic horse to the hitching-post, but in romance it ranges at will over the entire region of the imagination--free, lawless, immune to bit and rein.  Your novelist is a poor creature, as Carlyle might say--a mere reporter.  He may invent his characters and plot, but he must not imagine anything taking
An obsolescent appliance for reminding assassins that they too are mortal.  It is put about the neck and remains in place one's whole life long.  It has been largely superseded by a more complex electrical device worn upon another part of the person; and this is rapidly giving place to an apparatus known as the preachment. 
A member of the Parliamentarian party in the English civil war--so called from his habit of wearing his hair short, whereas his enemy, the Cavalier, wore his long.  There were other points of difference between them, but the fashion in hair was the fundamental cause of quarrel.  The Cavaliers were royalists because the king, an indolent fellow, found it more convenient to let his hair grow than to wash his neck.  This the Roundheads, who were mostly barbers
Worthless matter, such as the religions, philosophies, literatures, arts and sciences of the tribes infesting the regions lying due south from Boreaplas.  RUIN, v.  To destroy.  Specifically, to destroy a maid's belief in the virtue of maids. 
A favorite weapon of the assassins of character.  Sharp, irresistible by mail or shield, By guard unparried as by flight unstayed, O serviceable Rumor, let me wield Against my enemy no other blade. His be the terror of a foe unseen, His the inutile hand upon the hilt, And mine the deadly tongue, long, slender, keen, Hinting a rumor of some ancient guilt. So shall I slay the wretch without a blow, Spare
A weekly festival having its origin in the fact that God made the world in six days and was arrested on the seventh.  Among the Jews observance of the day was enforced by a Commandment of which this is the Christian version:  "Remember the seventh day to make thy neighbor keep it wholly."  To the Creator it seemed fit and expedient that the Sabbath should be the last day of the week, but the Early Fathers of the Church held other views.  So great is the sanct
A solemn religious ceremony to which several degrees of authority and significance are attached.  Rome has seven sacraments, but the Protestant churches, being less prosperous, feel that they can afford only two, and these of inferior sanctity.  Some of the smaller sects have no sacraments at all--for which mean economy they will indubitable be damned. 
Dedicated to some religious purpose; having a divine character; inspiring solemn thoughts or emotions; as, the Dalai Lama of Thibet; the Moogum of M'bwango; the temple of Apes in Ceylon; the Cow in India; the Crocodile, the Cat and the Onion of ancient Egypt; the Mufti of Moosh; the hair of the dog that bit Noah, etc.  All things are either sacred or profane. The former to ecc
A vertebrate mammal holding the political views of Denis Kearney, a notorious demagogue of San Francisco, whose audiences gathered in the open spaces (sandlots) of the town.  True to the traditions of his species, this leader of the proletariat was finally bought off by his law-and-order enemies, living prosperously silent and dying impenitently rich.  But before his treason he imposed upon California a constitution that was a confection of sin in a diction of solec
A dead sinner revised and edited.  The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator, Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called saint:  "I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint.  He was fond of saying indelicate things, and used to cheat at cards.  In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool." 
A certain literary quality frequently observed in popular novels, especially in those written by women and young girls, who give it another name and think that in introducing it they are occupying a neglected field of letters and reaping an overlooked harvest.  If they have the misfortune to live long enough they are tormented with a desire to burn their sheaves. 
Originally a reptile inhabiting fire; later, an anthropomorphous immortal, but still a pyrophile.  Salamanders are now believed to be extinct, the last one of which we have an account having been seen in Carcassonne by the Abbe Belloc, who exorcised it with a bucket of holy water. 
Among the Greeks a coffin which being made of a certain kind of carnivorous stone, had the peculiar property of devouring the body placed in it.  The sarcophagus known to modern obsequiographers is commonly a product of the carpenter's art. 
One of the Creator's lamentable mistakes, repented in sashcloth and axes.  Being instated as an archangel, Satan made himself multifariously objectionable and was finally expelled from Heaven.  Halfway in his descent he paused, bent his head in thought a moment and at last went back.  "There is one favor that I should like to ask," said he.  "Name it."  "Man, I understand, is about to be created.  He will
An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness.  In this country satire never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and sympathetic.  Moreover, although Americans are "endowed by their Creator" with abundant vice and folly, it is not generally known
One of the few characters of the Grecian mythology accorded recognition in the Hebrew.  (Leviticus, xvii, 7.)  The satyr was at first a member of the dissolute community acknowledging a loose allegiance with Dionysius, but underwent many transformations and improvements.  Not infrequently he is confounded with the faun, a later and decenter creation of the Romans, who was less like a man and more like a goat. 
The one infallible sign of civilization and enlightenment. A people with no sauces has one thousand vices; a people with one sauce has only nine hundred and ninety-nine.  For every sauce invented and accepted a vice is renounced and forgiven. 
A trite popular saying, or proverb.  (Figurative and colloquial.)  So called because it makes its way into a wooden head. Following are examples of old saws fitted with new teeth.  A penny saved is a penny to squander.  A man is known by the company that he organizes.  A bad workman quarrels with the man who calls him that.  A bird in the hand is worth what it will bring.  Better late than
The sacred beetle of the ancient Egyptians, allied to our familiar "tumble-bug."  It was supposed to symbolize immortality, the fact that God knew why giving it its peculiar sanctity.  Its habit of incubating its eggs in a ball of ordure may also have commended it to the favor of the priesthood, and may some day assure it an equal reverence among ourselves.  True, the American beetle is an inferior beetle, but the American priest is an inferior priest. 
The same as scarabaeus.  He fell by his own hand Beneath the great oak tree. He'd traveled in a foreign land. He tried to make her understand The dance that's called the Saraband, But he called it Scarabee. He had called it so through an afternoon, And she, the light of his harem if so might be, Had smiled and said naught.  O the body was fair to see, All frosted there in the shine o' the
A form of penance practised by the mediaeval pious. The rite was performed, sometimes with a knife, sometimes with a hot iron, but always, says Arsenius Asceticus, acceptably if the penitent spared himself no pain nor harmless disfigurement.  Scarification, with other crude penances, has now been superseded by benefaction. The founding of a library or endowment of a university is said to yield to the penitent a sharper and more lasting pain
A curved sword of exceeding keenness, in the conduct of which certain Orientals attain a surprising proficiency, as the incident here related will serve to show.  The account is translated from the Japanese of Shusi Itama, a famous writer of the thirteenth century.  When the great Gichi-Kuktai was Mikado he condemned to decapitation Jijiji Ri, a high officer of the Court.  Soon after the hour appointed for performance of the rite what was
A mark impressed upon certain kinds of documents to attest their authenticity and authority.  Sometimes it is stamped upon wax, and attached to the paper, sometimes into the paper itself.  Sealing, in this sense, is a survival of an ancient custom of inscribing important papers with cabalistic words or signs to give them a magical efficacy independent of the authority that they represent.  In the British museum are preserved many ancient papers, mostly of a sacerdotal character, validated by necromantic
A kind of net for effecting an involuntary change of environment.  For fish it is made strong and coarse, but women are more easily taken with a singularly delicate fabric weighted with small, cut stones.  The devil casting a seine of lace, (With precious stones 'twas weighted) Drew it into the landing place And its contents calculated.  All souls of women were in that sack-- A draft miraculous, precious! But ere he could throw it across his back They'd
A literary work, usually a story that is not true, creeping through several issues of a newspaper or magazine. Frequently appended to each installment is a "synposis of preceding chapters" for those who have not read them, but a direr need is a synposis of succeeding chapters for those who do not intend to read _them_.  A synposis of the entire work would be still better.  The late James F. Bowman was writing a serial tale for a weekly
Separateness, as, lands in severalty, i.e., lands held individually, not in joint ownership.  Certain tribes of Indians are believed now to be sufficiently civilized to have in severalty the lands that they have hitherto held as tribal organizations, and could not sell to the Whites for waxen beads and potato whiskey.  Lo! the poor Indian whose unsuited mind Saw death before, hell and the grave behind; Whom thrifty settler ne'er besought to stay
In America the chief executive officer of a county, whose most characteristic duties, in some of the Western and Southern States, are the catching and hanging of rogues.  John Elmer Pettibone Cajee (I write of him with little glee) Was just as bad as he could be.  'Twas frequently remarked:  "I swon! The sun has never looked upon So bad a man as Neighbor John."  A sinner through and through, he had This
The grunt of the human hog (_Pignoramus intolerabilis_) with an audible memory.  The speech of one who utters with his tongue what he thinks with his ear, and feels the pride of a creator in accomplishing the feat of a parrot.  A means (under Providence) of setting up as a wit without a capital of sense. 
A fragment, a decomponent part, a remain.  The word is used variously, but in the following verse on a noted female reformer who opposed bicycle-riding by women because it "led them to the devil" it is seen at its best:  The wheels go round without a sound-- The maidens hold high revel; In sinful mood, insanely gay, True spinsters spin adown the way From duty to the devil! They laugh, they sing, and--ting
The controversial method of an opponent, distinguished from one's own by superior insincerity and fooling.  This method is that of the later Sophists, a Grecian sect of philosophers who began by teaching wisdom, prudence, science, art and, in brief, whatever men ought to know, but lost themselves in a maze of quibbles and a fog of words.  His bad opponent's "facts" he sweeps away, And drags his sophistry to light of day;
The ancient prototype and forerunner of political influence.  It was, however, deemed less respectable and sometimes was punished by torture and death.  Augustine Nicholas relates that a poor peasant who had been accused of sorcery was put to the torture to compel a confession.  After enduring a few gentle agonies the suffering simpleton admitted his guilt, but naively asked his tormentors if it were not possible to be a sorcerer without knowing it. 
A spiritual entity concerning which there hath been brave disputation.  Plato held that those souls which in a previous state of existence (antedating Athens) had obtained the clearest glimpses of eternal truth entered into the bodies of persons who became philosophers.  Plato himself was a philosopher.  The souls that had least contemplated divine truth animated the bodies of usurpers and despots.  Dionysius I, who had threatened to decapitate the broad-browed philosopher, was a usurper
A writer whose imagination concerns itself with supernatural phenomena, especially in the doings of spooks.  One of the most illustrious spookers of our time is Mr. William D. Howells, who introduces a well-credentialed reader to as respectable and mannerly a company of spooks as one could wish to meet.  To the terror that invests the chairman of a district school board, the Howells ghost adds something of the mystery enveloping a farmer from another township. 
A narrative, commonly untrue.  The truth of the stories here following has, however, not been successfully impeached.  One evening Mr. Rudolph Block, of New York, found himself seated at dinner alongside Mr. Percival Pollard, the distinguished critic.  "Mr. Pollard," said he, "my book, _The Biography of a Dead Cow_, is published anonymously, but you can hardly be ignorant of its authorship.  Yet in reviewing it you speak
The one unpardonable sin against one's fellows.  In literature, and particularly in poetry, the elements of success are exceedingly simple, and are admirably set forth in the following lines by the reverend Father Gassalasca Jape, entitled, for some mysterious reason, "John A. Joyce."  The bard who would prosper must carry a book, Do his thinking in prose and wear A crimson cravat, a far-away look And a head of hexam
Expression of opinion by means of a ballot.  The right of suffrage (which is held to be both a privilege and a duty) means, as commonly interpreted, the right to vote for the man of another man's choice, and is highly prized.  Refusal to do so has the bad name of "incivism."  The incivilian, however, cannot be properly arraigned for his crime, for there is no legitimate accuser.  If the accuser is himself guilty he
One who approaches Greatness on his belly so that he may not be commanded to turn and be kicked.  He is sometimes an editor.  As the lean leech, its victim found, is pleased To fix itself upon a part diseased Till, its black hide distended with bad blood, It drops to die of surfeit in the mud, So the base sycophant with joy descries His neighbor's weak spot and his mouth applies, Gorges and prospers
An immaterial but visible being that inhabited the air when the air was an element and before it was fatally polluted with factory smoke, sewer gas and similar products of civilization.  Sylphs were allied to gnomes, nymphs and salamanders, which dwelt, respectively, in earth, water and fire, all now insalubrious.  Sylphs, like fowls of the air, were male and female, to no purpose, apparently, for if they had
Something that is supposed to typify or stand for something else.  Many symbols are mere "survivals"--things which having no longer any utility continue to exist because we have inherited the tendency to make them; as funereal urns carved on memorial monuments.  They were once real urns holding the ashes of the dead.  We cannot stop making them, but we can give them a name that conceals our helplessness. 
Pertaining to symbols and the use and interpretation of symbols.  They say 'tis conscience feels compunction; I hold that that's the stomach's function, For of the sinner I have noted That when he's sinned he's somewhat bloated, Or ill some other ghastly fashion Within that bowel of compassion. True, I believe the only sinner Is he that eats a shabby dinner. You know how Adam with good reason, For eating apples out of season, Was "
The part of an animal's spine that has transcended its natural limitations to set up an independent existence in a world of its own.  Excepting in its foetal state, Man is without a tail, a privation of which he attests an hereditary and uneasy consciousness by the coat-skirt of the male and the train of the female, and by a marked tendency to ornament that part of his attire where the tail should be, and indubitably once was.  This tendency
A scale of taxes on imports, designed to protect the domestic producer against the greed of his consumer.  The Enemy of Human Souls Sat grieving at the cost of coals; For Hell had been annexed of late, And was a sovereign Southern State.  "It were no more than right," said he, "That I should get my fuel free. The duty, neither just nor wise, Compels me to economize-- Whereby my broilers, every one, Are execrably under
In an English court a man named Home was tried for slander in having accused his neighbor of murder.  His exact words were:  "Sir Thomas Holt hath taken a cleaver and stricken his cook upon the head, so that one side of the head fell upon one shoulder and the other side upon the other shoulder."  The defendant was acquitted by instruction of the court, the learned judges holding that the words did not charge murder, for they did not affirm the death of the cook, that being
Ennui, the state or condition of one that is bored.  Many fanciful derivations of the word have been affirmed, but so high an authority as Father Jape says that it comes from a very obvious source--the first words of the ancient Latin hymn _Te Deum Laudamus_.  In this apparently natural derivation there is something that saddens. 
A certain quality of the human hand in its relation to the coin of the realm.  It attains its highest development in the hand of authority and is considered a serviceable equipment for a career in politics.  The following illustrative lines were written of a Californian gentleman in high political preferment, who has passed to his accounting:  Of such tenacity his grip That nothing from his hand can slip. Well-buttered eels you may o'erwhelm In tubs of
An ancient faith having all the certitude of religion and all the mystery of science.  The modern Theosophist holds, with the Buddhists, that we live an incalculable number of times on this earth, in as many several bodies, because one life is not long enough for our complete spiritual development; that is, a single lifetime does not suffice for us to become as wise and good as we choose to wish to become.  To be absolutely wise and good--that is
An habiliment of the stage designed to reinforce the general acclamation of the press agent with a particular publicity. Public attention was once somewhat diverted from this garment to Miss Lillian Russell's refusal to wear it, and many were the conjectures as to her motive, the guess of Miss Pauline Hall showing a high order of ingenuity and sustained reflection.  It was Miss Hall's belief that nature had not endowed Miss Russell with beautiful legs.  This theory was impossible of acceptance by the male
The House of Indifference.  Tombs are now by common consent invested with a certain sanctity, but when they have been long tenanted it is considered no sin to break them open and rifle them, the famous Egyptologist, Dr. Huggyns, explaining that a tomb may be innocently "glened" as soon as its occupant is done "smellynge," the soul being then all exhaled.  This reasonable view is now generally accepted by archaeologists, whereby the noble
A creature thoughtfully created to supply occasion for the following lines by the illustrious Ambat Delaso:   TO MY PET TORTOISE   My friend, you are not graceful--not at all; Your gait's between a stagger and a sprawl.  Nor are you beautiful:  your head's a snake's To look at, and I do not doubt it aches.  As to your feet, they'd make an angel weep. 'Tis true you
A tall vegetable intended by nature to serve as a penal apparatus, though through a miscarriage of justice most trees bear only a negligible fruit, or none at all.  When naturally fruited, the tree is a beneficient agency of civilization and an important factor in public morals.  In the stern West and the sensitive South its fruit (white and black respectively) though not eaten, is agreeable to the public taste and, though not exported, profitable to the general welfare.  That the legitimate relation of
A formal inquiry designed to prove and put upon record the blameless characters of judges, advocates and jurors.  In order to effect this purpose it is necessary to supply a contrast in the person of one who is called the defendant, the prisoner, or the accused.  If the contrast is made sufficiently clear this person is made to undergo such an affliction as will give the virtuous gentlemen a comfortable sense of their immunity, added to that of their worth.  In our day the accused is usually a
The pig's reply to proponents of porcophagy.  Moses Mendlessohn having fallen ill sent for a Christian physician, who at once diagnosed the philosopher's disorder as trichinosis, but tactfully gave it another name.  "You need an immediate change of diet," he said; "you must eat six ounces of pork every other day."  "Pork?" shrieked the patient--"pork?  Nothing shall induce me to touch it!"  "Do
In the multiplex theism of certain Christian churches, three entirely distinct deities consistent with only one.  Subordinate deities of the polytheistic faith, such as devils and angels, are not dowered with the power of combination, and must urge individually their claims to adoration and propitiation.  The Trinity is one of the most sublime mysteries of our holy religion.  In rejecting it because it is incomprehensible, Unitarians betray their inadequate sense of theological fundamentals.  In religion we
Specifically, a cave-dweller of the paleolithic period, after the Tree and before the Flat.  A famous community of troglodytes dwelt with David in the Cave of Adullam.  The colony consisted of "every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented"--in brief, all the Socialists of Judah. 
Pestilent bits of metal suspected of destroying civilization and enlightenment, despite their obvious agency in this incomparable dictionary.  TZETZE (or TSETSE) FLY, n.  An African insect (_Glossina morsitans_) whose bite is commonly regarded as nature's most efficacious remedy for insomnia, though some patients prefer that of the American novelist (_Mendax interminabilis_).     U  
The gift or power of being in all places at one time, but not in all places at all times, which is omnipresence, an attribute of God and the luminiferous ether only.  This important distinction between ubiquity and omnipresence was not clear to the mediaeval Church and there was much bloodshed about it.  Certain Lutherans, who affirmed the presence everywhere of Christ's body were known as Ubiquitarians.  For this error they were doubtless damned, for Christ
In diplomacy, a last demand before resorting to concessions.  Having received an ultimatum from Austria, the Turkish Ministry met to consider it.  "O servant of the Prophet," said the Sheik of the Imperial Chibouk to the Mamoosh of the Invincible Army, "how many unconquerable soldiers have we in arms?"  "Upholder of the Faith," that dignitary replied after examining his memoranda, "they are in numbers as the leaves of the
An oiling, or greasing.  The rite of extreme unction consists in touching with oil consecrated by a bishop several parts of the body of one engaged in dying.  Marbury relates that after the rite had been administered to a certain wicked English nobleman it was discovered that the oil had not been properly consecrated and no other could be obtained.  When informed of this the sick man said in anger: "Then I'll be damned if I die!"  "My son,"
A cerebral secretion that enables one having it to know a house from a horse by the roof on the house.  Its nature and laws have been exhaustively expounded by Locke, who rode a house, and Kant, who lived in a horse.  His understanding was so keen That all things which he'd felt, heard, seen, He could interpret without fail If he was in or out of jail. He wrote at Inspiration's call Deep disquisitions on them all, Then, pent
The kind of civility that urban observers ascribe to dwellers in all cities but New York.  Its commonest expression is heard in the words, "I beg your pardon," and it is not inconsistent with disregard of the rights of others.  The owner of a powder mill Was musing on a distant hill-- Something his mind foreboded-- When from the cloudless sky there fell A deviled human kidney!  Well, The man's mill had exploded. His hat he lifted
The First Person of the literary Trinity, the Second and Third being Custom and Conventionality.  Imbued with a decent reverence for this Holy Triad an industrious writer may hope to produce books that will live as long as the fashion. 
A soldierly compound of vanity, duty and the gambler's hope.  "Why have you halted?" roared the commander of a division and Chickamauga, who had ordered a charge; "move forward, sir, at once."  "General," said the commander of the delinquent brigade, "I am persuaded that any further display of valor by my troops will bring them into collision with the enemy." 
The tribute of a fool to the worth of the nearest ass.  They say that hens do cackle loudest when There's nothing vital in the eggs they've laid; And there are hens, professing to have made A study of mankind, who say that men Whose business 'tis to drive the tongue or pen Make the most clamorous fanfaronade O'er their most worthless work; and I'm afraid They're not entirely different from the hen. Lo! the
The instrument and symbol of a freeman's power to make a fool of himself and a wreck of his country.     W   W (double U) has, of all the letters in our alphabet, the only cumbrous name, the names of the others being monosyllabic.  This advantage of the Roman alphabet over the Grecian is the more valued after audibly spelling out some simple Greek word, like _epixoriambikos_.
A by-product of the arts of peace.  The most menacing political condition is a period of international amity.  The student of history who has not been taught to expect the unexpected may justly boast himself inaccessible to the light.  "In time of peace prepare for war" has a deeper meaning than is commonly discerned; it means, not merely that all things earthly have an end--that change is the one immutable and eternal law--but that the soil of peace is thickly
A Potomac tribesman who exchanged the privilege of governing himself for the advantage of good government.  In justice to him it should be said that he did not want to.  They took away his vote and gave instead The right, when he had earned, to _eat_ his bread. In vain--he clamors for his "boss," pour soul, To come again and part him from his roll.  Offenbach Stutz  
The climate of the hour.  A permanent topic of conversation among persons whom it does not interest, but who have inherited the tendency to chatter about it from naked arboreal ancestors whom it keenly concerned.  The setting up official weather bureaus and their maintenance in mendacity prove that even governments are accessible to suasion by the rude forefathers of the jungle.  Once I dipt into the future far as human eye could see, And I saw the Chief Forecaster, dead
A wolf that was once, or is sometimes, a man.  All werewolves are of evil disposition, having assumed a bestial form to gratify a beastial appetite, but some, transformed by sorcery, are as humane as is consistent with an acquired taste for human flesh.  Some Bavarian peasants having caught a wolf one evening, tied it to a post by the tail and went to bed.  The next morning nothing was there!  Greatly perplexed, they consulted the local
In the Ojibwa tongue, disaster; an unexpected affliction that strikes hard.  Should you ask me whence this laughter, Whence this audible big-smiling, With its labial extension, With its maxillar distortion And its diaphragmic rhythmus Like the billowing of an ocean, Like the shaking of a carpet, I should answer, I should tell you: From the great deeps of the spirit, From the unplummeted abysmus Of
A cereal from which a tolerably good whisky can with some difficulty be made, and which is used also for bread.  The French are said to eat more bread _per capita_ of population than any other people, which is natural, for only they know how to make the stuff palatable. 
  An animal usually living in the vicinity of Man, and having a rudimentary susceptibility to domestication.  It is credited by many of the elder zoologists with a certain vestigial docility acquired in a former state of seclusion, but naturalists of the postsusananthony period, having no knowledge of the seclusion, deny the virtue and declare that such as creation's dawn beheld, it roareth now.  The species is the most widely distributed of all beasts of prey
Anger of a superior quality and degree, appropriate to exalted characters and momentous occasions; as, "the wrath of God," "the day of wrath," etc.  Amongst the ancients the wrath of kings was deemed sacred, for it could usually command the agency of some god for its fit manifestation, as could also that of a priest.  The Greeks before Troy were so harried by Apollo that they jumped out of the frying-pan of the wrath of Chryses into the
The infancy of youth, the youth of manhood, the entire past of age.  But yesterday I should have thought me blest To stand high-pinnacled upon the peak Of middle life and look adown the bleak And unfamiliar foreslope to the West, Where solemn shadows all the land invest And stilly voices, half-remembered, speak Unfinished prophecy, and witch-fires freak The haunted twilight of the Dark of Rest. Yea, yesterday my soul was
An implement, madam, to whose Latin name, _jugum_, we owe one of the most illuminating words in our language--a word that defines the matrimonial situation with precision, point and poignancy. A thousand apologies for withholding it. 
The Period of Possibility, when Archimedes finds a fulcrum, Cassandra has a following and seven cities compete for the honor of endowing a living Homer.  Youth is the true Saturnian Reign, the Golden Age on earth again, when figs are grown on thistles, and pigs betailed with whistles and, wearing silken bristles, live ever in clover, and cows fly over, delivering milk at every door, and Justice never is heard to snore
A popular character in old Italian plays, who imitated with ludicrous incompetence the _buffone_, or clown, and was therefore the ape of an ape; for the clown himself imitated the serious characters of the play.  The zany was progenitor to the specialist in humor, as we to-day have the unhappiness to know him.  In the zany we see an example of creation; in the humorist, of transmission.  Another excellent specimen of the modern z
An inhabitant of the Sultanate of Zanzibar, off the eastern coast of Africa.  The Zanzibaris, a warlike people, are best known in this country through a threatening diplomatic incident that occurred a few years ago.  The American consul at the capital occupied a dwelling that faced the sea, with a sandy beach between.  Greatly to the scandal of this official's family, and against repeated remonstrances of the official himself, the people of the
A certain nervous disorder afflicting the young and inexperienced.  A passion that goeth before a sprawl.  When Zeal sought Gratitude for his reward He went away exclaiming:  "O my Lord!" "What do you want?" the Lord asked, bending down. "An ointment for my cracked and bleeding crown."  Jum Coople  
The point in the heavens directly overhead to a man standing or a growing cabbage.  A man in bed or a cabbage in the pot is not considered as having a zenith, though from this view of the matter there was once a considerably dissent among the learned, some holding that the posture of the body was immaterial.  These were called Horizontalists, their opponents, Verticalists.  The Horizontalist heresy was finally extinguished by Xanobus, the philosopher-king of Ab
The chief of Grecian gods, adored by the Romans as Jupiter and by the modern Americans as God, Gold, Mob and Dog.  Some explorers who have touched upon the shores of America, and one who professes to have penetrated a considerable distance to the interior, have thought that these four names stand for as many distinct deities, but in his monumental work on Surviving Faiths, Frumpp insists that the natives are monotheists, each having no other god than himself,
To move forward uncertainly, from side to side, as one carrying the white man's burden.  (From _zed_, _z_, and _jag_, an Icelandic word of unknown meaning.)  He zedjagged so uncomen wyde Thet non coude pas on eyder syde; So, to com saufly thruh, I been Constreynet for to doodge betwene.  Munwele  
The science and history of the animal kingdom, including its king, the House Fly (_Musca maledicta_).  The father of Zoology was Aristotle, as is universally conceded, but the name of its mother has not come down to us.  Two of the science's most illustrious expounders were Buffon and Oliver Goldsmith, from both of whom we learn (_L'Histoire generale des animaux_ and _A History of Animated Nature_) that the domestic
